Ci
 tyofCo
      vingt
          on,La
              .
Pl
 a         ngCommi
    ng& Zoni
  nni            ssi
                   onS
                     ubmi
                        ssi
                          on
Appl
   ic
    ato
      inf
        orP
          ero
            frma
               nceS
                  tanda
                      rdsRe
                          vie
                            w


   t
Addii
    onst
       oSt
         .Sho
           c a
             ls
              tc
               iaAc
                  ade
                    my
Prepa
    redbyHOLLY& SMI
                  TH ARCHI
                         TECTS,APAC
#13027




 v
Reis
   edOc
      t  r10,2014(
       obe       it
                  emsi
                     nre
                       d)
Aug
  ust1,2014
City of Covington Planning and Zoning Commission Submission

Additions to St. Scholastica Academy
Prepared by HOLLY & SMITH ARCHITECTS, APAC
August 01, 2014
Revised October 10, 2014 (items in red)
H/S Job# 13027
This document is a revision to the initial narrative submitted on August 1, 2014 to the City of
Covington and is in response to the following information submitted by the City of Covington:
   • Memo from City of Covington Planning and Zoning dated 20Aug14
   • Memo from City of Covington Department of Engineering (Traffic) dated 12Aug14
   • Memo from City of Covington Department of Engineering (Parking) dated 20Aug14
   • Memo from the City of Covington Police Department dated 15Aug14
   • Memo from the City of Covington Fire Department dated
   • Memo from the City of Covington Code Enforcement (Dr. Malcolm Guidry’s Tree Inspection
        Report) dated 03Sept14

Table of Contents
Bound Document
   • Application for Performance Standards Review
   • Project Narrative (Revised)
   • Vicinity Map
   • Colored Renderings Approved by the CHDC
   • Traffic Impact Study (revised in response to comments from CCDE)
   • Tree Preservation Plan, Tree Inventory & Condition Report
   • Site Lighting Cut Sheets
   • Site Lighting Layout
   • Preliminary Hydrologic Report (Update from Pinnacle Eng.)
   • Original 2002/2004 Hydrology Report (Scalfano Eng.)
   • Notarized Certificate of Ownership
   • Certificate of Appropriateness for New Construction of Gym & Multi-Purpose Building
   • Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition of Bogue Falaya Apartments
   • Letter from St. Peter Catholic School giving permission to share parking
   • Letter from Archdiocese acknowledging public use for on-street parking
   • Cash Sale of SSA Property.
   • Letter from SSA: shared parking with SSA’s Proposed New Gym & Multipurpose Building
Drawings
   • Property Survey (updated)
   • PZ 1.0 Overall Campus Parking Plan (Revised)
   • PZ 1.1 Area 1 Tree Planting Plan (Revised)
   • PZ 1.2 Area 2 Tree Planting Plan (Revised)
   • PZ 1.3 Carpool: Drop-off/Pick-up Traffic Plan
   • PZ 2.1 First Floor Plan (Revised)
   • PZ 2.2 Second Floor Plan (Revised)
   • PZ 3.1 Exterior Elevations 20th Ave. & 21st Ave.
   • PZ 3.2 Exterior Elevations Jahncke Ave. & Massachusetts St.




2|Narrative: Additions to St. Scholastica
                                      Project Narrative
August 1, 2014- Revised August 25, 2014

1. Introduction

This narrative is submitted in support of the submission made to the Covington Planning and
Zoning Commission under the Covington City Zoning regulations (The regulations) for the new
additions to Saint Scholastica Academy as follows:

   •   Area 1: New Gymnasium, multi-purpose, classroom and support facilities in the block
       bounded by South Jancke Ave, East 21st Avenue, East 20th Avenue and South Massachusetts
       Street.

       General Description of the Work: Demolition of the existing Wisdom Hall and
       Gymnasium and construction of a new gymnasium, multi-purpose facility, classroom
       building and support facilities. The new facilities will include a new gymnasium with seating
       capacity for 1000 (A Louisiana High School Athletic Association requirement) with dressing
       rooms, weight training facilities and support space, a new multi-purpose facility with seating
       for 667 in chairs with stage and support space, four (4) classrooms and six (6) training labs.
       Refer to Sheets mark PZ2.1 & PZ2.2 for floor plans showing the proposed structure.

       In addition to the building construction noted above, there are proposed site improvements
       both on and off site that include the following:

           o   New parking spaces on the South east side of the site
           o   Reorganized on-street parking on the North side of the site
           o   Reorganized on-street parking on both sides of East 21st Street
           o   A service drive on the South east side of the site
           o   Raised plaza and walk at the main entry to avoid affecting tree root systems
           o   Demolition of existing Jahncke Hall (An existing wood frame classroom building)
           o   A redeveloped interior parking lot at the corner of Jahncke & 21st Ave.
           o   Improved & reorganized parallel parking along East Rutland


   •   Area 2: New surface parking lot located in the existing lot presently containing an apartment
       complex owned by the Arch Diocese of New Orleans.

       General Description of the Work: Demolition of the existing apartment complex and
       construction of a new surface parking lot containing 44 new parking spaces. The new


3|Narrative: Additions to St. Scholastica
       parking lot will be paved using concrete curbs and gutter with limestone aggregate surface
       and subsurface drainage. The purpose of the limestone surface is to allow percolation of
       rainwater and to slow down the runoff of precipitation. Area 2 also includes improvements
       for a new parking lot within the Square 3 Ox Lot. This lot would also contain concrete
       curbs and gutter with limestone aggregate surface and subsurface drainage.

       Note: All improved limestone parking on public and private property which will be provided
       as part of this project will be improved and maintained at the cost of St. Scholastica. The
       spaces will be designated and defined by the placement of anchored concrete wheel stops
       placed at the end of each parking space.

2. Phasing of Construction

The project is proposed to be executed in 3 Phases as follows:

Phase 1: This construction work is the precursor to construction of the buildings in an effort to
provide additional parking spaces, provide additional space at on-street parking to alleviate
congestion on the surrounding streets and to reorganize the manner in which pick up and drop off is
managed. This work will include the following:

   •   Demolition of the Bogue Falaya apartment complex located on East Rutland Street
   •   Demolition of Wisdom Hall
   • New limestone parking lot on the former site of the Bogue Falaya Apartments.
   •   New limestone parking lot within the city owned Ox-Lot.
   •   New subsurface retention drainage along Jahncke Ave.
   •   New straight-in parking along the north east side of 21st Ave (in front of the SSA
       Development House).
   •   Moving existing fence inward to deepen parking spaces along with a curb at the bottom to
       contain aggregate and a parking bumper at the top to identify parking space within the
       parking spaces along 20th Ave. and Massachusetts St.
   •   New parallel parking along the south west side of Rutland St (behind the Development
       House).
   •   Reorganizing the pick-up drop-off line to alleviate conflicts at the corners of East Rutland,
       Jancke Ave. and Vermont Street as per the attached drawing marked Exhibit PZ1.3. The
       new drop off point is on Massachusetts Street as indicated. This will allow 65 cars in line for
       cueing. Our current observation of the carpool line indicates a total of 45 cars are cued up on
       a typical day.


4|Narrative: Additions to St. Scholastica
Phase 2: Upon completion of Phase 1 additional parking will have been provided and traffic
congestion will have been lessoned with the new drop-off / pick-up pattern shown in Exhibit PZ1.3.
Phase 2 will include the following:

    •   Construction of a new classroom building on Square 33 as shown on plans
    •   Construction of a new multi-purpose building on Square 33
    •   Construction of support spaces for the multi-purpose and the gymnasium on Square 33
    •   Installation of new parking lot at the southern corner of Square 33 near the intersection of
        Jahncke and 20th Ave. as indicated

Phase 3: Upon completion of Phase 2, Phase 3 will commence after the old gymnasium is vacated.
SSA will temporarily use the new multi-purpose for daily physical education activities and schedule
competition games elsewhere. The following will comprise the work in Phase 3:

    •   Demolition of the existing gymnasium
    •   Construction of a new gymnasium
    •   Reorganization of parking spaces on the South side of Massachusetts and the West side of
        21st Ave as shown on drawings
    •   Demolition of existing Jahncke Hall (An existing wood frame classroom building)
    •   Installation of parking lots along Jancke Ave. as indicated on plan (in the place of Jahncke
        Hall)




3. Zoning Classification

A review of the zoning map indicates that the property associated with Area 1 is zoned ID-
Institutional (Section 3.19) and Area 2 is zoned CDB- Community Business (Section 3.17).
Reference is made to the current City of Covington published Zoning Map. In both cases the uses
proposed meet the requirement of their respective sections.




4. HDC Overlay District

Both of the areas noted above are located within the City of Covington HDC Overlay District. A
review of the requirements of this overlay district indicate that the overlay district requirements and

5|Narrative: Additions to St. Scholastica
guidelines are less stringent than that of the ID (Institutional District) Zoning classification
requirements. Therefore, this application follows the guide as outlined by the ID Zoning
classification are the guide in meeting the requirements for this project.

Furthermore, it should be noted that the New Construction Project was submitted to the Covington
Historic District Commission on April 8, 2014 and was unanimously approved. The April 8th
approval contained the demolition of Wisdom Hall and the Existing Gymnasium as well as the
design for the all of the proposed new construction located on square 33 of Area 1 of this
application. The color renderings from that presentation are included herein for reference.

Additionally, a second appearance, on May 13, 2014, was made before the Covington Historic
Commission for the approval to demolish the existing Bogue Falaya Apartments located on square 3
to make way for the proposed new surface parking lot in Area 2 of this application. Again the
CHDC application was unanimously approved.

Copies of both Certificates of Appropriateness from the Covington Historic District Commission
are attached herein for reference.

5. Zoning Data for ID Zoning District

Reference is made to Sheet PZ1.0 – Covington Zoning Data Table. The following covers the issues
addressed within this table:

Set Back Requirements within the ID District

The ID Zoning designation defines set back requirements within Section 3.19 of the regulations.
Since the site covers an entire block, a determination was required as to the defined front / side / rear
yard locations. The regulations state that “on corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to
the street on which the lot has the least dimension” (reference is made to page 20 or 21 yard, front
definition). Since this is a whole block and the lot length is least along East 21st and East 20th Street,
the front yard was defined as the side facing east 21st Street. Section 3.1905 outlines the
requirements for setbacks as follows:

    •   Front yard -     Ten (10) Feet
    •   Side yard-       Fifteen (15) Feet (Corner lot requirement)
    •   Rear yard-       Ten (10) Feet

Reference is made to the attached drawing sheet mark PZ1.0, where the set back lines are indicated.
The building lines fall within the setback lines required above. The following yard setbacks have
been achieved on this proposed plan:


6|Narrative: Additions to St. Scholastica
    •   Front yard :    Fifteen (15) Feet – Along East 21 St.
    •   Side yard 1:    Fifteen (15) Feet- Along South. Massachusetts St.
    •   Side yard 2:    Twenty-One (21) Feet along South Jahncke St.
    •   Rear yard:      Twenty (20) Feet- Along East 20th Ave.



6. Lot Coverage Limitations within the ID District

 The site is located within the ID District limits the maximum lot coverage to 60% of the total area
of the lot. The requirement notes “maximum lot coverage: The lot coverage of all principal and accessory
buildings on a zoning lot shall not exceed 60% of the total area of the lot.” The lot in question is defined
as Square 33 which contains a total area of 60,000 square feet. The total footprint of the ground
floor equals to 29,002 square feet or 48% of the lot area. The lot area coverage is therefore achieved.

7. Maximum Height

Section 3.1907 of the regulations states “Height requirements- No building or structure shall exceed 35
feet above the finished grade of the property….”. The building elevations (refer to sheets PZ3.1 &
PZ3.2) indicate the following heights;

    •   Height to ridge of parapet walls:        35 feet
    •   Height to peak of gymnasium:             35 feet
    •   Height to roof edge:                     29 feet

The vast majority of the roof is the 29 foot height which is well within the 35 foot maximum height
limitation, therefore this requirement is achieved.

8. Traffic Impact Study

Section 3.1913 of the regulations requires that a traffic impact study be done if the development
exceeds the criteria outlines in section 4.6 of the regulations. Section 4.603(b) of the regulations
states that if an institutional use is proposed that exceeds 40,000 square feet, a traffic impact study is
required. The proposed addition to the site is a net add of 30,385 square feet and once demolition
takes place a total of 46,451 new square feet will exist on the site. SSA commissioned Tom Swanson,
PE, PTOE, a qualified transportation planner licensed by LAPELS to undertake a traffic study.
Comments were received from the city engineer (reference Letter dated Aug 12, 2014) and a
meeting was held to clarify the issues of significance on Thursday August 21. The comments have
been addressed and the traffic study has been revised. It was determined that the re-routing of the
carpool drop-off and pick-up per the attached drawing marked Exhibit PZ1.3 would provide

7|Narrative: Additions to St. Scholastica
significant relief to the peak traffic congestions. Reference is made to the attached revised Traffic
Impact Study conducted by GEC Engineers, September 2014.

The drivers who use the new carpool route will be guided with signage as indicated on drawing
marked exhibit PZ1.3.

9. Landscape Ordinance: Tree Planting Areas

Area 1

Section 4.208 requires street plantings for all new construction in ID Institutional zoned areas.
Street planting areas are designated on the attached drawings marked PZ1.1 & PZ1.2. 4.208.1c
states “When a corner property faces onto any two public streets, a ten-foot wide street planting area will
be required on the side street in addition to the front 15-foot street planting requirement”. In accordance
with this requirement the following conditions are achieved:

    •    Front Yard, East 21st Ave.                       15 feet Street Planting Area (Continuous)
    •    Corner Side Yard, Massachusetts St.              10 feet Street Planting Area (Continuous)
    •    Corner Side yard, Jahncke Ave.                   10 feet Street Planting Area (Continuous)
    •                       th
         Rear Yard, East 20 Ave.                          15 feet Street Planting Area (Continuous)

Within the described Street Planting Areas listed above section 4.208. 6a requires that “a min. of one
Class A tree for every 20 linear feet of building site frontage”. Furthermore, the same section indicates
that “Credit will be given on a one-to-one basis for existing trees preserved and protected in the street
planting area” In accordance with this requirement, the following conditions will be met.

    •    East 21st Ave. = 240 feet of frontage,                           requires 12 Class A trees
                                          2 existing trees within planting area will be preserved
                 Therefore,                                        10 Class A Trees are required


    •    Massachusetts St. = 250 feet of frontage                       requires 13 Class A trees
                                        1 existing tree within planting area will be preserved
               Therefore,                                       12 Class A Trees are required


    •    Jahncke Ave. = 250 feet of frontage                     requires 13 Class A trees
                                        2 existing trees within planting area will be preserved
                Therefore,                                       11 Class A Trees are required


    •    East 20th Ave. = 240 feet of frontage                    requires 12 Class A trees

8|Narrative: Additions to St. Scholastica
                                        1 existing tree within planting area will be preserved
                Therefore,                                      11 Class A Trees are required


Within Area 1, at the corner of Jahncke and 20th Ave., a newly resurfaced and improved interior
surface parking lot is planned. This parking lot was previously planned to be a new concrete surface
lot. It is now planned to be an asphalt surface partially over an existing concrete slab. The existing
slab will not be removed at the recommendation of our Arborist, John Benton as well as Dr.
Malcolm Guidry. This new parking lot is approximately 3539 square feet. . Section 4.209.1a
requires “landscaping for parking lots with more than seven parking spaces or that are larger than 3000
square feet”. And Section 4.209.1b requires that “Planting areas shall be a minimum of ten percent of
the paved parking area”. The attached drawing mark PZ1.1 illustrates the following:

    •   3539 square feet x 10%=         Required Planting Area of 359 square feet.
    •   Planting Area Shown=            1192 square feet

Planting Requirements: Section 4.209.2e requires “a minimum of one Class B tree be planted for every
seven parking spaces” The attached drawing mark PZ1.2 illustrates the following:

    •   10 parking spaces:      Requires two (2) Class B Trees



Within Area 1, at the corner of Jahncke and 21st Ave., a newly resurfaced and improved interior
surface parking lot is planned. This new parking lot is approximately 9408 square feet. Section
4.209.1a requires “landscaping for parking lots with more than seven parking spaces or that are larger
than 3000 square feet”. And Section 4.209.1b requires that “Planting areas shall be a minimum of ten
percent of the paved parking area”. The attached drawing mark PZ1.1 illustrates the following:

    •   9408 square feet x 10%=         Required Planting Area of 940 square feet.
    •   Planting Area Shown=            955 square feet

Planting Requirements: Section 4.209.2e requires “a minimum of one Class B tree be planted for every
seven parking spaces” The attached drawing mark PZ1.2 illustrates the following:

    •   29 parking spaces:      Requires five (5) Class B Trees




9|Narrative: Additions to St. Scholastica
Area 2

Apartment Lot
The new surface parking lot within Area 2 (on the site of the previous apartment complex) is
approximately 13,030 square feet. Section 4.209.1a requires “landscaping for parking lots with more
than seven parking spaces or that are larger than 3000 square feet”. And Section 4.209.1b requires that
“Planting areas shall be a minimum of ten percent of the paved parking area”. The attached drawing
mark PZ1.2 illustrates the following:
    • 13,030 square feet x 10%=           Required Planting Area of 1303 square feet.
    •    Planting Area Shown for Apartment Lot=              2161 square feet

Planting Requirements: Section 4.209.2e requires “a minimum of one Class B tree be planted for every
seven parking spaces” The attached drawing mark PZ1.2 illustrates the following:

    •    44 parking spaces:        Requires seven (7) Class B Trees

Ox Lot
The new surface parking lot within Area 2 (within the Ox Lot) is approximately 9393 square feet.
Section 4.209.1a requires “landscaping for parking lots with more than seven parking spaces or that are
larger than 3000 square feet”. And Section 4.209.1b requires that “Planting areas shall be a minimum
of ten percent of the paved parking area”. The attached drawing mark PZ1.2 illustrates the following:
     • 9006 square feet x 10%=            Required Planting Area of 900 square feet.
    •    Planting Area Shown for Ox Lot=            1651 square feet

Planting Requirements: Section 4.209.2e requires “a minimum of one Class B tree be planted for every
seven parking spaces” The attached drawing mark PZ1.2 illustrates the following:

    •    22 parking spaces:        Requires four (4) Class B Trees



Tree Mitigation

A tree mitigation plan has been submitted to the City of Covington under separate cover to Mr.
Wayne Mayberrry for review and response. It should be noted that the locations proposed for new
Live Oak planting are provided as suggestions only. SSA is open to alternative planting locations on
city owned property if it is more desirable to the City of Covington.

10. Layout of Site

The site layout as shown in this submission addresses all of the setbacks and landscape planting areas
required by the City of Covington as outlined in their zoning code. This layout was slightly adjusted


10 | N a r r a t i v e : A d d i t i o n s t o S t . S c h o l a s t i c a
from the submission sent to the Covington Historic District Commission (CHDC). The difference
is slight in that the building lines were over the setback lines when approved by the CHDC. Since
that time and after further review of the building layout, refinements were made that actually moved
the building back and lessoned the overall size of the building. This was done to meet the setback
lines and to move portions of the building further away from the street. This refinement actually
improves the conditions surrounding the building by allowing better parking conditions and better
sight lines at the corners.

In making these changes the building exterior has not significantly changed and has not expanded
beyond what was approved by the CHDC. The same materials, fenestration and detailing has
remained. The same heights have been achieved. Therefore the scale, mass, open space,
neighborhood or pedestrian orientations have remained as previously reviewed and approved and
have actually been improved.

11. Preservation of Existing Live Oak Trees

Approval of a Tree Removal Application is pending.

SSA has already requested a permit for the removal of (2) two Live Oak Trees located on block 33,
one tree measures 52”dbh and the other measures 48“dbh. A tree inventory and condition report
has been prepared by Bayou Tree Service, who is a licensed arborist specializing in the care and
preparation of Live Oak Trees for nearby construction. In the report, the two trees identified as
SSA-3 (52”dbh) & SSA-5 (48“dbh), are deemed in poor health and have structural issues that could
pose a safety hazard. The design team has made significant efforts to limit the impacts of
construction to as few trees as possible. There are (10) ten Live Oak Trees on site. Only the two
identified as SSA-3 & SSA-5 will be removed. The remaining trees will be prepared and monitored
by the owner’s licensed Arborist, per the attached report, to strengthen the health of the trees and
prepare them for construction. It should be noted that this team (Bayou Tree Service and Holly &
Smith Architects) have successfully executed a similar scope of work on the United States Federal
Courthouse in Baton Rouge and at the West Feliciana Parish Courthouse in St. Francisville. Both
of these projects were very similar in scope and complexity to what exists at SSA. The Federal
Courthouse in Baton Rouge was completed in 1993 and the West Feliciana Courthouse was
completed in 2005. All of the trees which were preserved and prepared for construction are alive
and thriving. Additionally, modifications have been made to the plan that will prohibit cars from
parking on the roots of the two water oak trees and one large live oak tree which are located on E.
20th Ave. near SSA’s outdoor dining pavilion. 4”x 4” treated wood bollards will be placed at 6’-0”
o.c. around the live oak tree as shown on the attached drawing marked PZ1.0. The parking spaces



11 | N a r r a t i v e : A d d i t i o n s t o S t . S c h o l a s t i c a
have been eliminated around the two water oak trees. These spaces will be restricted by concrete
barrier curbs and planting areas.

In response to Dr. Malcolm Guidry’s Inspection Report (dated09.03.14) modifications have been
made to the proposed parking lot near the corner of Jahncke Ave. and E. 20th Ave. There is already
a substantial area of existing concrete in this area which appears to have been a tennis court long ago.
SSA’s Arborist Consultant, Bayou Tree Services, has recommended that this existing concrete slab be
left in place and that it be topped with asphalt to provide a new parking surface. This is shown on
the attached drawing mark, PZ1.1. It would be substantially more disruptive to the tree to remove
the existing concrete than it would be to leave it in its current location. This slab has been in place
for many years and the root structure of the existing 78” Live Oak Tree has adapted to its presence.
Because the slab is already there, it makes perfect sense to use it as an undisturbed sub-base for an
asphalt parking lot.

Also, per Dr. Malcolm Guidry’s request, we have deleted three parking spaces in this same lot which
are closest to the corner of Jahncke Ave. and E. 20th Ave. because of their close proximity to the two
existing Live Oak Trees at the corner. These three spaces lie on an area of the parking lot which is
not on the existing concrete slab.

12. Parking Requirements

The construction program consists of an approach to the phased construction to relieve parking and
traffic flow prior to the construction of buildings as outlined in Phase 1 above. The approach after
the completion of Phase 1 will allow use of the existing gym while the multi-purpose space and
classrooms are being constructed (Phase 2) and then the use of the multi-purpose for daily physical
education while the new gym is under construction (Phase 3). The construction process will create
congestion and as a result it is proposed that the Phase 1 be initiated and completed to remove the
apartments on East Rutland and develop the parking in its place and in the Ox Lot in order to
provide additional parking for use during the construction process.

 A review of the parking regulations (refer to section 4.1 table 41.1) relative to this use indicates the
following requirements:

    •   High School:                       10 parking spaces / classroom
    •   Training Labs:                     10 spaces / training lab
    •   Junior High School:                4 spaces / classroom
    •   Assembly / Arenas / Theaters: 1 space / 6 seats (for multi-purpose and gymnasium)




12 | N a r r a t i v e : A d d i t i o n s t o S t . S c h o l a s t i c a
In order to establish parking requirements the entire campus will have to be considered since parking
requirements are calculated by instructional space for the school facilities. As a result of making this
count, the following exists:

NORMAL EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES

Classrooms

    •   Existing Classrooms on campus not affected by Construction:                 32 Classrooms
        (4 classrooms will be removed with the demolition of Jahncke Hall. They will not be
        replaced in this project)
    •   New Classrooms that replace Wisdom Hall:                                        4 Classrooms


        Total Classrooms after Completion of Construction:                            36 Classrooms

Of the classrooms outlined above the following applies to SSA:

    •   High School Classrooms (10th,11th, & 12th grades):            23 Classrooms
    •   Junior High Classrooms (8th & 9th grades):                    13 Classrooms

As a result of the above determination, the following parking spaces are required for the educational
use:

    •   High School Classrooms:            23 Classrooms @ 10 space / classroom=        230 Spaces
    •   Junior High Classrooms:            13 Classrooms @ 4 spaces per classroom=        52 Spaces


        Total Spaces required for Classrooms:                                            282 Spaces




MULTI-PURPOSE, GYMNASIUM & TRAINING LAB FACILITIES

Multi-Purpose Building

The attached drawing mark PZ2.1 shows a seating capacity of the new multi-purpose building of
700 seats. The requirement for multi-purpose is listed on page 2 of 37 in Table 41.1 under “Public
Assembly / Arenas / Theaters” as 1 space per 6 seats. Therefore the following parking requirement
applies:

13 | N a r r a t i v e : A d d i t i o n s t o S t . S c h o l a s t i c a
    •   Multi-Purpose Space: 667 seats @ 1 space per 6 seats =                           112 Spaces

Gymnasium Building

The attached drawing marks PZ2.1 & PZ2.2 show a seating capacity of 1000 seats in the new
gymnasium. This is based on the count of retractable bleacher seating. The requirement for
gymnasium is listed on page 2 of 37 in Table 41.1 under “Assembly / Arenas / Theaters” as 1 space per
6 seats. Therefore the following parking requirement applies:

    •   Assembly / Arenas / Theaters: 1000 seats @ 1 space per 6 seats =                 167 Spaces

Training Labs

The attached drawing marks PZ2.1 & PZ2.2 show a total of Five (5) Training Labs and one choral
room for a total of (6) Training Labs. These spaces are not classrooms. They are intended as multi-
purpose spaces to be used for after school extracurricular functions as well as STEM Labs (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics). The presence of theses spaces do not add to the total
student population. They will be used non-concurrently to the normal academic classrooms. The
requirement for training labs is listed on page 2 of 37 in Table 41.1 under “High Schools and
Vocational Schools” as 10 spaces per training lab. Therefore the following parking requirement
applies:

    •   Training Labs: 6 Labs @ 10 space / Lab =                                           60 Spaces


        Total Spaces required for Multi-Purpose, Gymnasium & Training Lab = 339 Spaces



Parking Count at the end of this Construction Program

As a result of completion of this construction program, the total parking count will be as follows:

    •   Off-street parking (SSA existing property):                                      185 Spaces
    •   On-street parking:                          138 spaces – 4 for On-Street Credits = 134 Spaces
    •   Ox Lot Improvements                                                               22 Spaces
    •   Shared Parking (with St. Peters Catholic School):                                 24 Spaces
        Total Parking                                                                    365 Spaces

The above represents an excess of 25 spaces from the required amount of 344 spaces for Gym &
Multi-purpose.


14 | N a r r a t i v e : A d d i t i o n s t o S t . S c h o l a s t i c a
Reduction of Parking Requirements allowed by Regulations

Section 4.103 of the regulations addresses combination of uses whereby it states “Off Street parking
for separate uses may be provided collectively if the aggregate number of spaces provided is not less than the
sum of the spaces required for each separately.”

Spaces Provided =                   365 Spaces
Therefore per section 4.103:        365 is greater than 282 (Classroom requirement) and,
                                    365 is greater than 339 (Gym & M.P. requirement).

Section 4.103 goes on to say in subparagraph 1 that “Joint use of 50 percent of required parking spaces
may be permitted for two or more uses, provided that the use of such facility by each user does not occur at
the same time.”

SSA meets this definition in that the use of the gym and multi-purpose is primarily an after school
use and when the gym or multi-purpose is in use during the school day it is being used by the
students of the school. As a result the following applies:

Classroom Requirement: 282 spaces x 50% =                                                      141 Spaces

Gymnasium & Multi-Purpose Requirement: 339 spaces x 50% =                                      170 Spaces

Total Shared Use:                                                                              311 Spaces



Reference to On-Street Parking

As mentioned previously, a traffic impact study has been conducted and is included herein with this
application as revised and dated September 2014 (signed 10.01.14). The study, has determined
that all of the roads surrounding the SSA campus which contain on-street parking meet the
LADOTD minimum design guidelines for functional classification of local roads. Included within
the traffic study appendix is a LADOTD Functional Classification Map which identifies the
roadway functional classification of the surrounding streets. Only Jahncke Ave. is classified as a
major collector and Boston St. is a principal arterial. This project does not consider or include any
on-street parking located on Jahncke Ave. or Boston Street. Therefore, section 4.105.2e stating that
“parking spaces located on arterial and/or collector streets may not be used for credited on-street
parking…” does not apply. Only On-street parking located on 20th Ave., 21st Ave. Massachusetts
St., and Rutland St. are considered in the overall parking counts.

Furthermore, SSA understands that exclusivity is not allowed. Per section 4.105.2f, “On street
parking spaces credited for a specific use shall not be used exclusively by that use, but shall be available for
general public use at all times.” SSA will not engage in any actions or signage that would limit general

15 | N a r r a t i v e : A d d i t i o n s t o S t . S c h o l a s t i c a
public use of these on-street spaces. This includes the improvements and parking spaces within the
Ox Lot.

Clearance from Fire Hydrants
Per the advisement of Al Courouleau, the City of Covington Building Inspector, no parking will
occur within 15’ of a fire hydrant. Existing fire hydrants locations are shown on drawing mark
PZ1.0.

Locations of Stop Signs
As per requirements set forth by the City of Covington Building and Planning departments, no
parking will be allowed within 30 feet of the approach side of stop signs. All stop signs have been
located on the plans for review.

Crosswalk Locations
As per requirements set forth by the City of Covington Building and Planning departments and as
recommended by the traffic study crosswalks markers have been identified and will be installed as
part of this project. Crosswalk locations are shown on the plans submitted herein.




Obstructions Within the City Right Of Way
The City of Covington Building and Planning Departments upon site review noted the following
areas that need to be addressed:
    • West side of Massachusetts St. has overhanging traffic in the travel lane of the roadway: The
        plan indicates that SSA proposes to move the fence in this location to allow there to be a full
        18 feet of clear parking area so that cars do not overhand onto the roadway.
    • East side of 20th Avenue does not allow for there to be a sidewalk due to a conflict with
        parking: The plan indicates that the fence is moving further east enough distance to allow a
        full 18 foot parking space and a side walk.

Combined Public / Private Parking
The above solutions and the proposed solution along 21st Ave. adjacent and across the street from
the gymnasium and multi-purpose present a condition whereby the parking spaces are partially on
public right of way and partially on property owned by the Arch Diocese of New Orleans. It has
already been established that the owner recognizes that the parking shown within the public right-of-
way is available to the public to use and this condition has been acknowledged by the owner in
writing. The owner is also in agreement to allow the portion of property that the parking space
overlaps to be available to the public equally as to the public property access letter included within
this submission.

Parking Located on Adjacent Lots


16 | N a r r a t i v e : A d d i t i o n s t o S t . S c h o l a s t i c a
The City of Covington Building and Planning Departments have indicated that Section 4.104 of the
Zoning Code indicates that parking spaces located on another lot must be no more than 300 feet
from the facility in which it serves along the nearest pedestrian walkway. The code section notes the
following:
….The parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the use or where exclusive use of such is
provided on another lot not more than 300 feet measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway; provided,
however that the zoning classification for such land is the same or less restrictive than the classification of
the lot upon which the main use is located.

The plan submitted indicates the distance form lot to lot of all parking facilities via the closest
pedestrian walkway for parking associated with the facility.

Parking Signage
In the private parking lots set aside for use by the owner, there is a plan to install identification
signage that addresses the use of these private parking lots for the benefit of SSA. Additionally SSA
has a plan to update their publications that address parking during events and during normal school
hours to cover these identified spaces and how they are to be used.

Parking Conclusion
The primary goal of this new expansion project is to provide essential facilities necessary for the
continued success of St. Scholastica Academy. In conjunction with that, it is the desire of SSA to
improve the parking and traffic situation both immediately on and around the SSA campus. This
project will relieve parking congestion in the immediate area of the site which will benefit the
community and make conditions around the campus safer. There is a plan to develop a more orderly
and logical traffic pickup and drop off sequence that will create a safer condition on public streets
and relieve some of the congestion on Jahncke Ave. The revised carpool plan has been reviewed and
coordinated with Chief Lentz of the Covington Police Department. He noted that it was a
significant improvement. He requested that along with the revised carpool plan, students be released
in two stages to avoid traffic conflicts. The two stages would entail an initial release of carpool
students being picked up followed by the release of driving students once carpool is complete.
Furthermore, developing the new gymnasium as well as new parking configurations will create an
opportunity to improve site lines at the corners. This is especially so at the corner of 21st and
Massachusetts, where the footprint of the new gymnasium will be moved within the current required
setbacks, thus backing it away from the corner property line.


13. Hydrological Report

Reference is made to the attached Preliminary Hydrological Report prepared by Tom Schneider, PE
of Pinnacle Engineering, LLC dated July 31, 2014.

17 | N a r r a t i v e : A d d i t i o n s t o S t . S c h o l a s t i c a
14. Water and Sewer Service Connections

The water and sewer connections to the proposed structures will be made to the existing lines that
are located in the street rights-of-way surrounding Square 33. We anticipate reusing the existing
sewer connections that presently handle the waste from the Gymnasium and the Wisdom Hall.

For the water service, the existing connections will be evaluated to determine whether they are
adequate for the proposed improvements. This determination will be made in the design phase of
the project when the actual demands for the buildings will be established. As part of this project, a
new 6” fire connection will be made to the City’s water distribution system. The location for this
connection will be determined during the design phase.

15. Building Signage

Building and School signage is not planned as part of this project at this time. Identification signage
for parking lots is discussed in the parking portion of this submission above. If it does become
evident that owner requires and/or desires building or school signage at a later date, Part 6,
Covington Sign Regulations will be followed and the signage will be submitted to both Planning &
Zoning as well as the Covington Historic District Commission for approval.



16. Exterior Site Lighting

Exterior lighting is to be Pulse Start Metal Halide and LED type. Control of exterior lighting will be
through time clock and photocell. Exterior lighting will be served at 277 volt, single phase where
possible to minimize voltage drop. All exterior lighting shall be full cut-off, dark sky compliant.
Light spillage past the property line will be limited to less than 2 foot candles.

Lighting types for each space type will be the following types:
Parking Lot & Pedestrian Way – 15’ Pole with a single LED Lamp
Sidewalks – Wall Mounted LED wall packs

Lighting in each space will generally provide the following illumination level:
Parking Lot & Pedestrian Way – 2 foot candle average
Sidewalks – 1 foot candle average

The lighting proposed for the exterior pole mounted lighting is as indicated in the attachment.
Additionally, a site layout is included within this package that indicates the location of light poles
within the site as well as all associated light levels.

18 | N a r r a t i v e : A d d i t i o n s t o S t . S c h o l a s t i c a
17. Legal Description of Square 33 & Square 3

(1)    Square No. 33 of the Division of Spring, Town of Covington, said square being bounded by
Jahnke Avenue, Asia Street, Mississippi Street and Independence Street, and measuring 240 feet by
250 feet, as per map of resubdivision by John E. Bonneau & Associates, Inc. dated September 9,
2013.

(2)     ALL THAT CERTAIN PIECE OR PARCEL OF LAND, together with all the buildings
and improvements thereon and all rights, ways, means, privileges, servitudes, prescriptions,
appurtenances and advantages thereunto belonging or in anywise appertaining thereto, situated in
Square 3, being parts of Lots 1, 2, 3, 13 14 and all of Lots 15 and 16, Division of St. John, City of
Covington, St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana, more fully described as follows, to-wit:

The Point of Beginning is 115 feet West from the corner of common to North Vermont and East
Rutland Street being a point on the South lot line of Lot 14, Square 3, Division of St. John.

From the Point of Beginning go along East Rutland Street in the direction of Massachusetts Street
135.0 feet to an iron; thence at a right angle in the direction of Boston Street go North 170.0 feet to
an iron; thence at a right angle go East in the direction of North Vermont Street 10 feet to an iron;
thence at a right angle go South along the rear lot line of Lot 3 of said Square 50.0 feet to an iron;
thence at a right angle go East in the direction of North Vermont Street 125.00 feet to an iron;
thence at a right angle go South in the direction of East Rutland Street 120.00 feet to the Point of
Beginning.

All in accordance with that survey by John E. Bonneau, Registered Land Surveyor, dated October 1,
2007, a copy of which is attached to Act of Cash Sale recorded at Instrument No. 1674905 with the
Clerk of Court for the Parish of St. Tammany, State of Louisiana.




19 | N a r r a t i v e : A d d i t i o n s t o S t . S c h o l a s t i c a
St. Scholastica Academy                                                                                                 Covington, LA


TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                                                                                                        Page

LIST OF TABLES ............................................................................................................................... i 
LIST OF FIGURES ............................................................................................................................ ii 
LIST OF APPENDICES ................................................................................................................... ii 
LIST OF REFERENCES ................................................................................................................. iii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................ 1 
  I. INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... 2 
  II. STUDY AREA ........................................................................................................................... 3 
  III. BASELINE TRAFFIC CONDITIONS .............................................................................. 6 
  IV. DEVELOPMENT.................................................................................................................. 9 
  V. TRIP GENERATION .......................................................................................................... 11 
  VI. SITE TRAFFIC DISTRIBUTION .................................................................................... 14 
  VII. INTERSECTION ANALYSES ....................................................................................... 17 
  VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ..................................................... 30 



LIST OF TABLES
                                                                                                                                        Page

TABLE I –               TRIP GENERATION SUMMARY…………………………………...….13

TABLE II –              LOS CRITERIA FOR TWO-WAY & ALL-WAY STOP CONTROL
                        INTERSECTIONS……………………………………………………….18

TABLE III – LOS CRITERIA FOR SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS…………...…18

TABLE IVA – CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS……..…………...………...……...….19

TABLE IVB – CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS……..…………...………...……...….20

TABLE VA – CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS……..…………...………...……...….23

TABLE VB – CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS……..…………...………...……...….24

TABLE VIA – CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS……..…………...………...……...….28

TABLE VIB – CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS……..…………...………...……...….29




                                                                       i                                                   September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                        Covington, LA


LIST OF FIGURES
                                                                         Page

FIGURE 1 -                LOCATION MAP………..………………………………….…….3

FIGURE 2 -                EXISTING INTERSECTION VOLUMES…..…………….…….7

FIGURE 3 -                NATURAL GROWTH INTERSECTION VOLUMES...….….…8

FIGURE 4 -                SITE PLAN ………………………………………………...….…10

FIGURE 5 -                EVENING PEAK VOLUMES…...…………...…………………12

FIGURE 6 -                DISTRIBUTION PERCENTAGES ...……………….…………..15

FIGURE 7 -                TRIP GENERATION PROJECTIONS………..…….…………..16

FIGURE 8 -                POST DEVELOPMENT EVENT VOLUMES .…….…………..22

FIGURE 9 -                REVISED QUEUING PLAN ...………………..…….…………..26

FIGURE 10 -               REVISED AM NETWORK DISTRIBUTION .....…..…….…….27

LIST OF APPENDICES


A.      TRIP GENERATION CALCULATION SUMMARY

B.      TURNING MOVEMENT COUNT DATA

C.      SYNCHRO REPORTS: EXISTING YEAR

D.      SYNCHRO REPORTS: NATURAL GROWTH

E.      SYNCHRO REPORTS: EVENT EXISTING CONDITIONS

F.       SYNCHRO REPORTS: POST DEVELOPMENT EVENT CONDITIONS

G.      MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC DATA




                                         ii                      September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                      Covington, LA


LIST OF REFERENCES
TRIP GENERATION BY TRAFFICWARE, v.8, 2013.

SYNCHRO BY TRAFFICWARE, VERSION 8, 2013.

HIGHWAY CAPACITY MANUAL, TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH BOARD,
SPECIAL REPORT 209, WASHINGTON, D.C., 2000.

LADOTD MINIMUM DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR URBAN AND SUBURBAN
COLLECTOR ROADS AND STREETS, 2013.




                                 iii           September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                       Covington, LA


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
OVERVIEW
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the traffic impacts associated with the renovation of
the St. Scholastica Academy, an all-girls high school located at the southwest corner of the
intersection of E. Boston Street and S. Massachusetts Street in Covington, LA. The scope of
this study includes the physical description of the existing location, traffic data such as
current turning movement counts, and technical analyses to evaluate existing traffic volumes.
It includes trip generation estimates and future traffic operations.

The school is located in a fully developed area in the city of Covington. The heaviest traffic
around the proposed redevelopment is along S. Jahncke Ave., and E. Boston St. which
borders the southeast edge of the property being developed and the north edge of the St.
Scholastica School.

The improvement of this facility is not expected to have significant adverse impact on traffic
volumes during the normal school operations. Several locations in the network already have
some issues.

While the intersection of S. Jahncke Ave. and E. 21st Ave. does meet the traffic signal
warrant, it is only during the morning peak. The intersection of E. 20th Ave. at S. Jahncke
Ave. does have excessive delay on the E. 20th Ave. approaches. This is a problem mainly in
the morning peak.

A study was also performed on the roadway network for the time period of a potential
special event. After a review of the volumes at the area around the school facility, it is
anticipated that the studied intersections are expected to operate within the acceptable Level
of Service thresholds for this evening time period.

RECOMMENDATIONS

The realignment of E. 21st Ave. to a one way westbound instead of eastbound appears to
alleviate the problem at the intersection of E. 21st Ave. at S. Jahncke Ave.

There are numerous sidewalks in the neighborhood surrounding the school. To improve
pedestrian safety and traffic flow in the vicinity of the school improvements, the following
improvements should be considered:

Painted crosswalks connecting sidewalks on the following intersections:
 S. Massachusetts and E. Rutland St. at E. 21st St.
 E. Rutland St. at N. Vermont St.
 E. 21st St. at S. Jahncke Ave.
 S. Massachusetts at 20th
 E. 20th St. at S. Jahncke Ave.




                                              1                                 September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                        Covington, LA



I. INTRODUCTION

Purpose of Study

The purpose of this study is to evaluate the traffic impacts associated with the renovation of the St.
Scholastica Academy, which includes the new gymnasium and multipurpose facility, replacement of
existing classroom facilities, gym support space, and new training rooms, which is to be located in
the southwest corner of the intersection of E. 21st Avenue and South Massachusetts Street in
Covington, LA. (See Figure 1).

The objectives of this study are:
    To adequately assess the traffic impacts associated with the addition of the proposed school
       building, and to identify traffic control improvements required to service the studied area;
    To provide public agencies a comprehensive study which evaluates and documents the
       traffic impacts and recommended improvements, where warranted;
    To provide a technically sound basis to identify impacts and related mitigation requirements
       in response to surrounding traffic impacts.

This study includes an evaluation of the traffic operations at the studied intersections using a
comparison of the Synchro analysis output reports for the post-construction scenario with existing
volumes (year 2014), and the Year 2017 scenario demonstrates that the existing roadway network is
capable of accommodating the development and natural growth of the area.




                                               2                                 September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                   Covington, LA


II. STUDY AREA
The studied area roadway system identified for investigation includes eight intersections in the
immediate vicinity of the proposed new school building. Figure 1 is a map of the study area and
illustrates the five intersections studied in this analysis.


Figure 1: Location Map




                                    New Parking




                          New Facility




                                            3                               September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                        Covington, LA


Existing Roadway Network

E. Boston Street (LA 21) operates as a two-way, two-lane asphalt paved roadway with sidewalks
on either side of the street. The roadway runs generally in an east-west direction. It is striped
double yellow, to indicate no passing, and shoulders are striped off of the curb. Speed limit in this
area is posted at 25mph.

S. Theard Street operates as a two-way, two-lane asphalt paved roadway that runs generally in a
north-south direction. South of 20th Avenue, it is a one way road northbound. St. Scholastica
Academy property is located on the east side of the street, and the St. Peter School is located on the
west in the area of the study.

S. Jahncke Avenue operates as a two-way, two-lane asphalt paved roadway with some restricted
parking on the east side of the street. The roadway runs generally in a north-south direction.

S. Massachusetts Street operates as a one-way southbound, single-lane roadway between E. 20th
Avenue and E. 21st Avenue, with some roadside parking. It continues as a two lane two way
roadway from N. Massachusetts Street from 21st Avenue (including roadside parking) and
southward from 20th Avenue. It runs generally north to south.

E. Rutland Street operates as a two-way, two-lane roadway with roadside parking not permitted
between E. 20th Avenue and E. 21st Avenue; it runs parallel to S. Massachusetts Street up to E. 21st
Avenue. The roadway runs generally in an north-south direction.

E. 21st Avenue operates as a one-way, single-lane roadway with roadside parking Between S.
Jahnke and S. Masachusetts Street. It operates as two-way two-lane roadway on either side of the
campus. Some roadside parking is permitted. The roadway runs generally in an east-west direction.

E. 20th Avenue operates as a two-way, two-lane roadway on the southern edge of the school
complex. The roadway runs generally in an east-west direction. There is roadside parking along the
north side of the street.

N. Vermont Street operates as a two-way, two-lane roadway north of the school site from the
intersection of E. Rutland Street and S. Jahnke Street.




Functional Classification

Most travel occurs through a network of interdependent roadways, with each roadway segment
moving traffic through the system towards destinations. The concept of functional classification
defines the role that a particular roadway segment plays in serving this flow of traffic through the
network. The Federal Highway Administration has several categories of functional classification.
The LADOTD has created maps of urban areas located around the state.



                                               4                                 September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                         Covington, LA


Of the roadways listed above, E. Boston Street is listed as a Principal Arterial; and S. Jahncke Ave.is
classified as a Major Collector by the LADOTD. All others inside the study area are considered
Local Roads.

A diagram indicating the Functional Classification of the studied roadways is in the Appendix.


A brief description of each study intersection is listed below.

       E. Boston St. at S. Massachusetts St.. - A four-legged intersection with stop controls on
        the S. Massachusetts St. approaches.

       S. Massachusetts St. and E. Rutland St. at E. 21st St. - A four-legged intersection with
        stop controls on Massachusetts St. The existing campus is located on the southwest corner
        of this intersection. The facility expansion is in the southeast corner of this intersection.

       E. Rutland St. at N. Vermont St. - A four-legged intersection with stop controls on all
        four approaches.

       E. 21st St. at S. Jahncke Ave. - A four-legged intersection with stop controls on the 21st
        St. approaches.

       S. Massachusetts at 20th St. – A four-legged intersection with stop controls on the S.
        Massachusetts approaches. The existing campus is located on the northwest corner of this
        intersection. The facility expansion is in the northeast corner of this intersection.

       E. 20th St. at S. Jahncke Ave.- A four-legged intersection with stop controls on the 20th
        St. approaches.

       S. Theard St. at E. Boston St. - A four-legged (five, counting a parking lot entrance)
        intersection with stop controls on the S. Theard St. approaches. A supermarket, enters the
        intersection at an angle on the west side of Theard St. There were very low traffic volumes
        recorded to and from this intersection at the peak hours, and were therefore not considered
        in the intersection analysis. E. Boston St. turns to a more north-south direction at this
        intersection as well.

Discussion

With the exception of E. Boston St, there is no crosswalk paint is visible at most of the
surrounding intersections.

For the most part the existing roadside parking is gravel shoulders.




                                               5                                  September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                        Covington, LA


III. BASELINE TRAFFIC CONDITIONS
Existing Traffic Volume Data

Given the functional characteristics of the study area and the land use for the site, the peak hours
selected for analysis were weekday AM, PM peak, and a potential PM event periods. The
combination of site traffic and adjacent thru traffic produces the greatest demand during these time
periods.

Weekday AM and PM peak traffic counts were obtained by GEC, Inc., at the study area
intersections previously identified. Data collection occurred from 6:00 to 9:00 AM, 3:00 to 7:00
PM, and 7:00 to 9:00 PM. These time frames were selected because they represent the greatest
combination of traffic on the adjacent highways for the type of land use proposed for the site. All
turning movement count data was collected on Tuesday August 26, 2014. The turning movement
count data is included in Appendix C.

The peak hour operations at the study intersections were analyzed using Synchro 8 software with
the existing roadway geometry and existing Year 2014 traffic volumes. A diagram illustrating the
counted intersection volumes traffic is shown in Figure 2.

There is very heavy congestion in and around the campus area, primarily in the morning,
coincidental with student pick up and drop off.

Students are normally dropped off at the intersection of S. Massachusetts, 21st Ave, and Rutland
Ave. The cars are normally lined up along Rutland and then turn south along 21st Ave. Most often,
the cars are also lined up along N. Vermont St.

There is also significant pedestrian traffic, especially on S. Massachusetts St. and E. 21st Ave. This
slows vehicles down and increases congestion.

This is a well-developed residential area; overall traffic growth is expected to be low. A projection
of traffic volume for 3 years in the future was created assuming a growth rate of 1.5%.

Figure 3 depicts the projected vehicular volumes due to natural growth of the population.




                                               6                                 September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                      Covington, LA


IV. DEVELOPMENT
Description

The new facilities will include a new gymnasium and multipurpose facility, replacement of existing
classroom facilities, gym support space, and new training rooms. Some current roadside gravel
parking will be replaced by marked paved parking along the roadside.

The gym and multi-purpose facility will serve purposes outside its functions as part of the school.
There will be a potential for up to 1700 occupants. These functions, however, will not be part of
the daily routine and are not expected to contribute any trips during the hours of the daily peak
traffic volumes.

In addition, a new 44 space parking lot will be constructed on the north side of E. Rutland St.
between 21st Avenue and S. Jahncke Ave. with access to S. Massachusetts St. and E. Rutland St.

Figure 4 depicts the projected site plan of the development.




                                             9                                September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                      Covington, LA


V. TRIP GENERATION
Site Traffic Generation

Site traffic generation determines the additional traffic attributable to the development, more
specifically, the vehicle trips entering and exiting the site. Trip generation can be defined as an
estimate of the number of trips generated by specific building or land uses. These trips represent
the volume of new traffic added to the roadways due to the proposed development as well as traffic
diverted from the existing traffic stream and other on-site land uses. The volume of traffic
generated by a site is dependent on the intended land use and size of the development. Trip
Generation,v.8 by Trafficware, a software package based on Trip Generation, 9th Edition,
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), was used as a reference for this
information.

No increase in student body is expected as a result of this construction project, so traffic values
during school hours are not expected to change for purposes of this study.

The multi-purpose facility is expected to occasionally host activities at times other than normal
school hours; for example, a basketball game. For this reason, an estimate was to be made of an
evening function. We took the traffic counts for a weekday evening to serve as a baseline traffic
value.

For the potential event evening time period, the traffic volumes in this roadway network are
extremely low.

Figure 5 depicts the existing evening event time period roadway volumes.




                                             11                               September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                           Covington, LA


For the Multi-Purpose facility, there was no land use category that was exact. The closest match we
found was the ‘Multi-Purpose Recreational Facility’ (ITE Land Use Code: 435). The variable used
for that type of facility was based on facility area, in our case; the facility covers 40,000 square feet.

Given that the parking requirements for a facility seating capacity are six persons per vehicle; these
trip generation volumes do not seem unreasonable.



                          TABLE I – TRIP GENERATION SUMMARY

                                        Total AM Peak Hr
         Land Use          Variable                             Total PM Peak Hr Volume (vph)
                                          Volume (vph)
          Multi-
                          40,000 Sq.
         Purpose                           79 Inbound                     64 Outbound
                              Ft.
         Facility




                                                13                                  September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                        Covington, LA


VI. SITE TRAFFIC DISTRIBUTION
Site Traffic Distribution

The cumulative effect of site traffic on the transportation network is dependent on the origins and
destinations of that traffic and the location of the access drives serving the site. The proposed
arrival/departure distribution of traffic to be generated at this site is considered a function of
several parameters, including the following:

                             Travel patterns at the existing site
                             Existing traffic conditions and controls
                             Proposed site access drive locations
                             Population centers in the area
                             Existing highway network

The methodology for the site traffic distribution is based on existing traffic counts and the location
of trip generators and trip attractions in the vicinity of the proposed site.

Figure 6 indicates the projected event distribution percentages for the roadway network.

Figure 7 indicates the projected generated event volumes for the roadway network.




                                                14                               September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                                         Covington, LA



VII. INTERSECTION ANALYSES
Analysis Methodology
The capacity of a highway system is predicated by two components: the capacity of the included
roadway sections and the capacity of the affected intersections along the route. Intersecting
roadways generally provide the initial constraint on a system's capacity. Efficiency at the
intersections becomes the critical constraint for capacity. Vehicle interactions at these points must
therefore be analyzed to assess the projected operation and capacity levels.

The standard procedure for capacity analysis of signalized and unsignalized intersections is outlined
in the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) published by the Transportation Research Board.
Synchro 8 Software was used in analyzing operating conditions at study area intersections. The
procedure yields a Level of Service (LOS) as an indicator of how well intersections operate.

The concept of LOS is defined as a qualitative measurement describing operating conditions within
a traffic stream and their perception by motorists and/or passengers. LOS is defined in terms of
delay which is a measure of driver discomfort, frustration, fuel consumption, and lost travel time.

Six Levels of Service, with corresponding levels of delay are defined for analysis. They are assigned
letter designations, from “A” to “F”, with LOS “A” representing the best conditions (little or no
delay), LOS “C” average conditions and LOS “F” the worst (excessive delay). The projected traffic
volumes, generated by the site and added to the background traffic volumes, are analyzed to assess
the capacity potential of the study area intersections.

Table II depicts LOS criteria for Two-Way-Stop-Control (TWSC) and All-Way-Stop-Control
(AWSC) Intersections and Table III depicts LOS criteria for signalized intersections.

It should be noted, that the intersection of S. Massachusetts/E. Rutland Ave. AT
E. 21st Ave. /S. Massachusetts St. is not an allowed configuration for HCM analysis, but the
intersection operates well in simulation. It should also be noted that there is very heavy pedestrian
traffic at this intersection, as well as significant pedestrian traffic at the intersection of S. Jahnke
Ave and E. 21st Ave. So that should be taken into account as well.

Tables IVA and IVB depict LOS calculation results for the existing conditions and natural growth
conditions.




                                               17                                 September 2014
St. Scholastica Academy                                          Covington, LA


 TABLE II – LEVEL OF SERVICE CRITERIA FOR TWO-WAY AND ALL-WAY STOP
                       CONTROL INTERSECTIONS

                     Level of Service        Control Delay per Vehicle (sec)
                            A                             < 10
                            B                         >10 to < 15
                            C                         > 15 to < 25
                            D                         > 25 to < 35
                            E                         > 35 to < 50
                            F                             > 50



TABLE III – LEVEL OF SERVICE CRITERIA FOR SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS

                     Level of Service        Control Delay per Vehicle (sec)
                            A                             < 10
                            B                         >10 to < 20
                            C                         > 20 to < 35
                            D                         > 35 to < 55
                            E                         > 55 to < 80
                            F                             > 80




                                        18                           September 2014
      St. Scholastica Academy                                                                                         Covington, LA


                                         TABLE IVA – CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS
                                                                                                                             Natural Growth (2017
                                         Intersection                                          Baseline Conditions
                                                                                                                                   Volumes)

                       S. Jahncke Ave. AT               E. 20th Ave.                             AM            PM                 AM             PM
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (1.7 sec)    A (0.8 sec)        A (1.7 sec)    A (0.8 sec)
        Northbound: S. Jahncke Ave.                          Thru Movement                   A (1.7 sec)    A (0.8 sec)        A (1.7 sec)    A (0.8 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (1.7 sec)    A (0.8 sec)        A (1.7 sec)    A (0.8 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (0.1 sec)    A (0.0 sec)        A (0.1 sec)    A (0.0 sec)
        Southbound: S. Jahncke Ave.                          Thru Movement                   A (0.1 sec)    A (0.0 sec)        A (0.1 sec)    A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.1 sec)    A (0.0 sec)        A (0.1 sec)    A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                E (48.4 sec)   B (13.5 sec)       F (61.8 sec)   B (12.6 sec)
          Eastbound: E. 20th Ave.                            Thru Movement                   E (48.4 sec)   B (13.5 sec)       F (61.8 sec)   B (12.6 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               E (48.4 sec)   B (13.5 sec)       F (61.8 sec)   B (12.6 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (23.1 sec)   B (13.6 sec)       C (24.6 sec)   B (12.9 sec)
          Westbound: E. 20th Ave.                            Thru Movement                   A (23.1 sec)   B (13.6 sec)       C (24.6 sec)   B (12.9 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (23.1 sec)   B (13.6 sec)       C (24.6 sec)   B (12.9 sec)
                    S. Massachusetts St. AT               E. 20th Ave.                           AM            PM                 AM             PM
                                                           Left Turn Movement                B (10.6 sec)   B (12.5 sec)       B (10.6 sec)   B (11.8 sec)
      Northbound: S. Massachusetts St.
                                                           Right Turn Movement               B (10.6 sec)   B (12.5 sec)       B (10.6 sec)   B (11.8 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                B (10.6 sec)   B (11.0 sec)       B (10.6 sec)   B (11.0 sec)
     Southbound: S. Massachusetts St.                        Thru Movement                   B (10.6 sec)   B (11.0 sec)       B (10.6 sec)   B (11.0 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               B (10.6 sec)   B (11.0 sec)       B (10.6 sec)   B (11.0 sec)


          Eastbound: E. 20th Ave.                            Thru Movement                   A (0.0 sec)    A (0.0 sec)        A (0.0 sec)    A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.0 sec)    A (0.0 sec)        A (0.0 sec)    A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (1.6 sec)    A (3.5 sec)        A (1.6 sec)    A (3.4 sec)
          Westbound: E. 20th Ave.                            Thru Movement                   A (1.6 sec)    A (3.5 sec)        A (1.6 sec)    A (3.4 sec)


                       S. Jahncke Ave. AT               E. 21st Ave.                             AM            PM                 AM             PM

         Northbound: S. Jahnke St.                           Thru Movement                   A (0.0 sec)    A (0.0 sec)        A (0.0 sec)    A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.0 sec)    A (0.0 sec)        A (0.0 sec)    A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (0.1 sec)    A (0.9 sec)        A (0.1 sec)    A (0.9 sec)
         Southbound: S. Jahnke St.                           Thru Movement                   A (0.1 sec)    A (0.9 sec)        A (0.1 sec)    A (0.9 sec)


                                                           Left Turn Movement                F (54.9 sec)   B (14.8 sec)       F (73.0 sec)   B (14.8 sec)
          Eastbound: E. 21st Ave.                            Thru Movement                   F (54.9 sec)   B (14.8 sec)       F (73.0 sec)   B (14.8 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               F (54.9 sec)   B (14.8 sec)       F (73.0 sec)   B (14.8 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                D (31.4 sec)   B (13.5 sec)       D (33.8 sec)   B (13.1 sec)
          Westbound: E. 21st Ave.
                                                           Right Turn Movement               D (31.4 sec)   B (13.5 sec)       D (33.8 sec)   B (13.1 sec)
S. Massachusetts/E. Rutland Ave. AT                                       E. 21st Ave. /S.
                                                                                                 AM            PM                 AM             PM
                                   Massachussets St.

Northbound: S. Massachusetts/E. Rutland Ave.                      N/A


             N. Vermont St./S. Jahncke Ave. AT                E. Rutland Ave.                    AM            PM                 AM             PM
                                                           Left Turn Movement                C (28.6 sec)   A (9.3 sec)        E (35.9 sec)   A (9.6 sec)
         Northbound: S. Jahnke St.                           Thru Movement                   C (28.6 sec)   A (9.3 sec)        E (35.9 sec)   A (9.6 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               C (28.6 sec)   A (9.3 sec)        E (35.9 sec)   A (9.6 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                B (16.1 sec)   A (8.2 sec)        B (17.7 sec)   A (8.3 sec)
         Southbound: S. Jahnke St.                           Thru Movement                   B (16.1 sec)    A (8.2sec)        B (17.7 sec)   A (8.3 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               B (16.1 sec)   A (8.2 sec)        B (17.7 sec)   A (8.3 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                B (10.7 sec)   A (8.1 sec)        B (11.0 sec)   A (8.1 sec)
         Eastbound: E. Rutland Ave.                          Thru Movement                   B (10.7 sec)   A (8.1 sec)        B (11.0 sec)   A (8.1 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               B (10.7 sec)   A (8.1 sec)        B (11.0 sec)   A (8.1 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                B (17.9 sec)   A (8.6 sec)        B (19.7 sec)   A (8.7 sec)
        Westbound: E. Rutland Ave.                           Thru Movement                   B (17.9 sec)   A (8.6 sec)        B (19.7 sec)   A (8.7 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               B (17.9 sec)   A (8.6 sec)        B (19.7 sec)   A (8.7 sec)




                                                                             19                                            September 2014
        St. Scholastica Academy                                                                               Covington, LA


                                         TABLE IVB – CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS
                                                                                                                       Natural Growth (2017
                                         Intersection                                   Baseline Conditions
                                                                                                                             Volumes)

                         S. Theard St. AT                E. 20th St.                     AM             PM                  AM            PM
                                                             Left Turn Movement       B (10.8 sec)   A (7.7 sec)        B (10.9 sec)   A (7.8 sec)
          Northbound: S. Theard St.                            Thru Movement          B (10.8 sec)   A (7.7 sec)        B (10.9 sec)   A (7.8 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       B (10.8 sec)   A (7.5 sec)        B (10.9 sec)   A (7.8 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (8.3 sec)    A (7.5 sec)         A (8.3 sec)   A (7.6 sec)
         Southbound: S. Theard St.
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (8.3 sec)    A (7.7 sec)         A (8.3 sec)   A (7.6 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (9.0 sec)    A (7.7 sec)         A (9.1 sec)   A (7.8 sec)
           Eastbound: E. 20th St.                              Thru Movement          A (9.0 sec)    A (7.7 sec)         A (9.1 sec)   A (7.8 sec)



           Westbound: E. 20th St.                              Thru Movement          A (8.3 sec)    A (8.1 sec)         A (8.8 sec)   A (8.2 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (8.3 sec)    A (8.1 sec)         A (8.8 sec)   A (8.1 sec)
                S. Massachusetts St. AT                 S. Boston St. (LA 21)            AM             PM                  AM            PM
                                                             Left Turn Movement       C (24.8 sec)   B (12.5 sec)       D (25.0 sec)   B (12.8 sec)
      Northbound: S. Massachusetts St.                         Thru Movement          C (24.8 sec)   B (12.5 sec)       D (25.0 sec)   B (12.8 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       C (24.8 sec)   B (12.5 sec)       D (25.0 sec)   B (12.8 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       C (23.5 sec)   D (30.8 sec)       C (23.3 sec)   D (34.2 sec)
      Southbound: S. Massachusetts St.                         Thru Movement          C (23.5 sec)   D (30.8 sec)       C (23.3 sec)   D (34.2 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       C (23.5 sec)   D (30.8 sec)       C (23.3 sec)   D (34.2 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (0.5 sec)    A (0.1 sec)         A (0.5 sec)   A (0.1 sec)
      Eastbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement          A (0.5 sec)    A (0.1 sec)         A (0.5 sec)   A (0.1 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (0.5 sec)    A (0.1 sec)         A (0.5 sec)   A (0.1 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (1.4 sec)    A (0.2 sec)         A (1.5 sec)   A (0.2 sec)
      Westbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement          A (1.4 sec)    A (0.2 sec)         A (1.5 sec)   A (0.2 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (1.4 sec)    A (0.2 sec)         A (1.5 sec)   A (0.2 sec)

         S. Theard St./Supermarket Parking AT                 S. Boston St. (LA 21)      AM             PM                  AM            PM
                                                             Left Turn Movement       C (22.8 sec)   C (20.9 sec)       C (25.5 sec)   C (20.7 sec)
          Northbound: S. Theard St.                            Thru Movement          C (22.8 sec)   C (20.9 sec)       C (25.5 sec)   C (20.7 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       C (22.8 sec)   C (20.9 sec)       C (25.5 sec)   C (20.7 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement          N/A            N/A                 N/A           N/A
         Northbound: Supermarket                               Thru Movement             N/A            N/A                 N/A           N/A
                                                            Right Turn Movement          N/A            N/A                 N/A           N/A
                                                             Left Turn Movement       B (13.9 sec)   C (15.1 sec)       B (14.3 sec)   C (15.1 sec)
         Southbound: S. Theard St.                             Thru Movement          B (13.9 sec)   C (15.1 sec)       B (14.3 sec)   C (15.1 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       B (13.9 sec)   C (15.1 sec)       B (14.3 sec)   C (15.1 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (0.6 sec)    A (0.4 sec)         A (0.6 sec)   A (0.4 sec)
      Eastbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement          A (0.6 sec)    A (0.4 sec)         A (0.6 sec)   A (0.4 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (0.6 sec)    A (0.4 sec)         A (0.6 sec)   A (0.4 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (1.4 sec)    A (0.4 sec)         A (1.5 sec)   A (0.4 sec)
      Westbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement          A (1.4 sec)    A (0.4 sec)         A (1.5 sec)   A (0.4 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (1.4 sec)    A (0.4 sec)         A (1.5 sec)   A (0.4 sec)




As the results above show, two intersections in the studied network fail under existing conditions, after
three years, another intersection can also be expected to deteriorate.

A warrant analysis was performed on the three intersections that showed failure.

The intersection of S. Jahnke Ave. at 21st St. does meet the peak hour warrant. The warrant analysis data
sheet for this intersection with the existing AM volumes is included in the appendix.




                                                                                20                                 September 2014
       St. Scholastica Academy                                                    Covington, LA


       Event Conditions

As shown previously in Figure 5, the traffic volumes in the roadway network are very low. Using the
previously projected distribution, we projected the traffic patterns for an evening event.

Figure 8 depicts the total intersection volumes projected for an evening event.

Tables VA and VB depict LOS calculation results for the existing conditions for evening events and post
construction conditions during special events.




                                                     21                            September 2014
              St. Scholastica Academy                                                                             Covington, LA



                                                 TABLE VA –CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS

                                         Intersection                                                      Event Calculations


                       S. Jahncke Ave. AT               E. 20th Ave.                         PM Event            PM Event Post Construction
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (0.4 sec)                 A (0.3 sec)
        Northbound: S. Jahncke Ave.                          Thru Movement                   A (0.4 sec)                 A (0.3 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.4 sec)                 A (0.3 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
        Southbound: S. Jahncke Ave.                          Thru Movement                   A (0.0 sec)                  A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (9.5 sec)                 A (9.6 sec)
          Eastbound: E. 20th Ave.                            Thru Movement                   A (9.5 sec)                  A (9.6 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (9.5 sec)                 A (9.6 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (9.1 sec)                 A (9.3 sec)
          Westbound: E. 20th Ave.                            Thru Movement                   A (9.1 sec)                  A (9.3 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (9.1 sec)                 A (9.3 sec)
                    S. Massachusetts St. AT               E. 20th Ave.                       PM Event            PM Event Post Construction
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
      Northbound: S. Massachusetts St.
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (8.4 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
      Southbound: S. Massachusetts St.                       Thru Movement                   A (8.4 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (8.4 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)


          Eastbound: E. 20th Ave.                            Thru Movement                   A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (0.0 sec)                 A (8.4 sec)
          Westbound: E. 20th Ave.                            Thru Movement                   A (0.0 sec)                  A (8.4 sec)


                       S. Jahncke Ave. AT               E. 21st Ave.                         PM Event            PM Event Post Construction

         Northbound: S. Jahnke St.                           Thru Movement                   A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
         Southbound: S. Jahnke St.                           Thru Movement                   A (0.0 sec)                  A (0.0 sec)


                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (0.0 sec)                 A (8.6 sec)
          Eastbound: E. 21st Ave.                            Thru Movement                   A (0.0 sec)                  A (8.6 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.0 sec)                 A (8.6 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
          Westbound: E. 21st Ave.
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.0 sec)                 A (0.0 sec)
S. Massachusetts/E. Rutland Ave. AT                                       E. 21st Ave. /S.
                                                                                             PM Event            PM Event Post Construction
                                   Massachussets St.

Northbound: S. Massachusetts/E. Rutland Ave.                      N/A


             N. Vermont St./S. Jahncke Ave. AT                E. Rutland Ave.                PM Event            PM Event Post Construction
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (7.0sec)                   A (7.4 sec)
         Northbound: S. Jahnke St.                           Thru Movement                   A (7.0sec)                   A (7.4 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (7.0sec)                   A (7.4 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (7.4 sec)                 A (7.6 sec)
         Southbound: S. Jahnke St.                           Thru Movement                   A (7.4 sec)                 A (7.6 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (7.4 sec)                 A (7.6 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (0.0 sec)                 A (7.5 sec)
         Eastbound: E. Rutland Ave.                          Thru Movement                   A (0.0 sec)                 A (7.5 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (0.0 sec)                 A (7.5 sec)
                                                           Left Turn Movement                A (7.4 sec)                 A (7.7 sec)
        Westbound: E. Rutland Ave.                           Thru Movement                   A (7.4 sec)                 A (7.7 sec)
                                                           Right Turn Movement               A (7.4 sec)                 A (7.7 sec)




                                                                                 23                                 September 2014
             St. Scholastica Academy                                                                     Covington, LA


                                         TABLE VB –CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS
                                         Intersection                                                Event Calculations


                         S. Theard St. AT                E. 20th St.                  PM Event             PM Event Post Construction
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (7.1 sec)                   A (7.1 sec)
          Northbound: S. Theard St.                            Thru Movement          A (7.1 sec)                   A (7.1 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (7.1 sec)                  A (7.1 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (7.1 sec)                   A (7.1 sec)
         Southbound: S. Theard St.
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (7.1 sec)                  A (7.1 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement        A (7.3sec)                   A (7.3sec)
           Eastbound: E. 20th St.                              Thru Movement          A (7.3 sec)                   A (7.3 sec)



           Westbound: E. 20th St.                              Thru Movement          A (6.6 sec)                   A (6.6 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (6.6 sec)                  A (6.6 sec)
                S. Massachusetts St. AT                 E. Boston St. (LA 21)         PM Event             PM Event Post Construction
                                                             Left Turn Movement       C (12.5 sec)                 C (19.3 sec)
      Northbound: S. Massachusetts St.                         Thru Movement          C (12.5 sec)                 C (19.3 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       C (12.5 sec)                 C (19.3 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       D (30.8 sec)                 B (10.6 sec)
      Southbound: S. Massachusetts St.                         Thru Movement          D (30.8 sec)                 B (10.6 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       D (30.8 sec)                 B (10.6 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (0.1 sec)                   A (0.0 sec)
      Eastbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement          A (0.1 sec)                   A (0.0 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (0.1 sec)                  A (0.0 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (0.2 sec)                   A (0.1 sec)
      Westbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement          A (0.2 sec)                   A (0.1 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (0.2 sec)                  A (0.1 sec)

         S. Theard St./Supermarket Parking AT                 E. Boston St. (LA 21)   PM Event             PM Event Post Construction
                                                             Left Turn Movement       B (12.3 sec)                 A (12.9 sec)
          Northbound: S. Theard St.                            Thru Movement          B (12.3 sec)                 A (12.9 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       B (12.3 sec)                 A (12.9 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement          N/A                           N/A
         Northbound: Supermarket                               Thru Movement             N/A                           N/A
                                                            Right Turn Movement          N/A                           N/A
                                                             Left Turn Movement       B (11.1 sec)                 B (11.5 sec)
          Southbound: S. Theard St.                            Thru Movement          B (11.1 sec)                 B (11.5 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       B (11.1 sec)                 B (11.5 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (0.0 sec)                   A (0.0 sec)
      Eastbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement          A (0.0 sec)                  A (0.0 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (0.0 sec)                  A (0.0 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement       A (0.1 sec)                   A (0.1 sec)
      Westbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement          A (0.1 sec)                   A (0.1 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement       A (0.1 sec)                  A (0.1 sec)
                           S. Massachusetts St. at Driveway #1                                            PM Event Post Construction
                                                             Left Turn Movement
      Northbound: S. Massachusetts St.                         Thru Movement                                       A (0.0 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement                                    A (0.0 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement                                    A (6.1 sec)
      Southbound: S. Massachusetts St.                         Thru Movement                                       A (6.1 sec)


                                                             Left Turn Movement                                    A (8.8 sec)
          Westbound: Driveway #1
                                                            Right Turn Movement                                    A (8.8 sec)
                              E. Rutland Ave. at Driveway #2                                              PM Event Post Construction
                                                             Left Turn Movement                                     A (8.7 sec)
         Southbound: Driveway #2                               Thru Movement
                                                            Right Turn Movement                                     A (8.7 sec)
                                                             Left Turn Movement                                    A (0.0 sec)
        Eastbound: E. Rutland Ave.                             Thru Movement                                       A (0.0 sec)



        Westbound: E. Rutland Ave.                             Thru Movement                                       A (0.0 sec)
                                                            Right Turn Movement                                    A (0.0 sec)




The existing volumes in the study area were very low, and as the above results show, the roadway network can
be expected to operate at acceptable levels.




                                                                                24                         September 2014
           St. Scholastica Academy                                                         Covington, LA


Potential for Improvement

Given that there are already significant traffic challenges surrounding the school even without the construction
of the multi-purpose facility, we explored some possible corrective action to address them. The intersection
with the greatest challenges is the intersection of E. 21st Ave, and S. Jahncke Ave. Virtually all of the vehicles
travel west on 21st Ave after dropping students off. In addition, vehicles arriving from the south via S. Jahncke
Ave. must take a sharp left turn on to Rutledge to get to the drop-off location.

As previously indicated, the intersection of E. 21st Ave. at S. Jahncke Ave. does meet the peak hour warrant.

An idea has been presented to change the direction of E. 21st Ave. to northbound, and direct the drop-off
traffic to use E. 21st Ave. as the approach; turn east on E. Rutland Ave. then turn into the new parking lot, exit
the parking lot left onto S. Massachusetts St., and then turn right on Massachusetts Street, dropping
off/picking up students in front of Benedictine Hall on Massachusetts St.

A depiction of the realignment is shown in Figure 9.

We redistributed the traffic volumes for the AM peak to ascertain the potential improvements on the roadway
network.

Traffic volumes for the revised AM peak distribution are shown in Figure 10.

Capacity Analysis results for the realignment of E. 21st Ave. are shown below in Tables VIA and VIB.

As the results show, this does appear to alleviate much of the problems at the intersections of E. 21st Ave. and
S. Jahncke, and S. Jahncke, E. Rutland and N. Vermont.




                                                          25                                 September 2014
              St. Scholastica Academy                                                                            Covington, LA



               TABLE VIA –CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS


                                           Intersection                                                     AM Redistribution



                        S. Jahncke Ave. AT                    E. 20th Ave.                           AM Post Construction Redistribution
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                               A (1.7 sec)
           Northbound: S. Jahnke St.                                Thru Movement                                 A (1.7 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                              A (1.7 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                               A (0.1 sec)
           Southbound: S. Jahnke St.                                Thru Movement                                 A (0.1 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                              A (0.1 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                              E (48.4 sec)
            Eastbound: E. 20th Ave.                                 Thru Movement                                E (48.4 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                             E (48.4 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                              C (23.1 sec)
           Westbound: E. 20th Ave.                                  Thru Movement                                C (23.1 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                             C (23.1 sec)
                     S. Massachusetts St. AT                    E. 20th Ave.                         AM Post Construction Redistribution
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                              B (13.7 sec)
       Northbound: S. Massachusetts St.
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                             B (13.7 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                              B (13.8 sec)
       Southbound: S. Massachusetts St.                             Thru Movement                                B (13.8 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                             B (13.8 sec)

            Eastbound: E. 20th Ave.                                 Thru Movement                                 A (0.0 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                              A (0.0 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                               A (1.6 sec)
           Westbound: E. 20th Ave.                                  Thru Movement                                 A (1.6 sec)


                        S. Jahncke Ave. AT                    E. 21st Ave.                           AM Post Construction Redistribution

           Northbound: S. Jahnke St.                                Thru Movement                                 A (3.9 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                              A (3.9 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                               A (0.0 sec)
           Southbound: S. Jahnke St.                                Thru Movement                                 A (0.0 sec)

                                                                 Left Turn Movement                              C (21.6 sec)
           Westbound: E. 21st Ave.
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                             C (21.6 sec)

S. Massachusetts/E. Rutland Ave. AT                                               E. 21st Ave. /S.
                                                                                                     AM Post Construction Redistribution
                                          Massachussets St.


 Northbound: S. Massachusetts/E. Rutland Ave.                       Thru Movement                                 A (8.9 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                             A (8.9 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                              B (13.0 sec)
 Southbound: S. Massachusetts/E. Rutland Ave.
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                             B (13.0 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                               A (0.0 sec)
      Westbound: S. Massachusetts Ave.
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                              A (0.0 sec)
              N. Vermont St./S. Jahncke Ave. AT                     E. Rutland Ave.                  AM Post Construction Redistribution
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                              B (14.0 sec)
           Northbound: S. Jahnke St.                                Thru Movement                                B (14.0 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                             B (14.0 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                              A (13.2 sec)
           Southbound: S. Jahnke St.                                Thru Movement                                A (13.2 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                             A (13.2 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                               A (0.0 sec)
          Eastbound: E. Rutland Ave.                                Thru Movement                                 A (0.0 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                              A (0.0 sec)
                                                                 Left Turn Movement                              C (15.2 sec)
          Westbound: E. Rutland Ave.                                Thru Movement                                C (15.2 sec)
                                                                 Right Turn Movement                             C (15.2 sec)




                                                                               28                                  September 2014
       St. Scholastica Academy                                                              Covington, LA


       TABLE VIB –CAPACITY ANALYSIS RESULTS


                                   Intersection                                        AM Redistribution



                   S. Theard St. AT                E. 20th St.                  AM Post Construction Redistribution
                                                      Left Turn Movement                    B (11.2 sec)
    Northbound: S. Theard St.                            Thru Movement                      B (11.2 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                   B (11.2 sec)
                                                      Left Turn Movement                     A (8.4 sec)
   Southbound: S. Theard St.
                                                      Right Turn Movement                    A (8.4 sec)
                                                      Left Turn Movement                     A (9.1 sec)
     Eastbound: E. 20th St.                              Thru Movement                       A (9.1 sec)


     Westbound: E. 20th St.                              Thru Movement                       A (9.4 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                    A (9.4 sec)
          S. Massachusetts St. AT                 E. Boston St. (LA 21)         AM Post Construction Redistribution
                                                      Left Turn Movement                    C (20.7 sec)
Northbound: S. Massachusetts St.                         Thru Movement                      C (20.7 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                   C (20.7 sec)
                                                      Left Turn Movement                    D (28.1 sec)
Southbound: S. Massachusetts St.                         Thru Movement                      D (28.1 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                   D (28.1 sec)
                                                      Left Turn Movement                     A (1.4 sec)
Eastbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement                       A (1.4 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                    A (1.4 sec)
                                                      Left Turn Movement                     A (0.5 sec)
Westbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement                       A (0.5 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                   A (0.5 sec)
   S. Theard St./Supermarket Parking AT                 E. Boston St. (LA 21)   AM Post Construction Redistribution
                                                      Left Turn Movement                    D (30.1 sec)
    Northbound: S. Theard St.                            Thru Movement                      D (30.1 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                   D (30.1 sec)
                                                      Left Turn Movement                        N/A
   Northbound: Supermarket                               Thru Movement                          N/A
                                                      Right Turn Movement                       N/A
                                                      Left Turn Movement                    B (13.9 sec)
    Southbound: S. Theard St.                            Thru Movement                      B (13.9 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                   B (13.9 sec)
                                                      Left Turn Movement                     A (0.6 sec)
Eastbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement                       A (0.6 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                    A (0.6 sec)
                                                      Left Turn Movement                     A 1.4 sec)
Westbound: E. Boston St. (LA 21)                         Thru Movement                       A 1.4 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                    A 1.4 sec)
                     S. Massachusetts St. at Driveway #1                        AM Post Construction Redistribution
                                                       Left Turn Movement
Northbound: S. Massachusetts St.                         Thru Movement                       A (0.0 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                    A (0.0 sec)
                                                       Left Turn Movement                    A (0.9 sec)
Southbound: S. Massachusetts St.                         Thru Movement                       A (0.9 sec)

                                                       Left Turn Movement                   B (11.1 sec)
    Westbound: Driveway #1
                                                      Right Turn Movement                   B (11.1 sec)
                        E. Rutland Ave. at Driveway #2                          AM Post Construction Redistribution
                                                       Left Turn Movement                    A (0.0 sec)
   Southbound: Driveway #2                               Thru Movement
                                                      Right Turn Movement                    A (0.0 sec)
                                                       Left Turn Movement                    A (8.5 sec)
  Eastbound: E. Rutland Ave.                             Thru Movement                       A (8.5 sec)


  Westbound: E. Rutland Ave.                             Thru Movement                       A (0.0 sec)
                                                      Right Turn Movement                    A (0.0 sec)




                                                                     29                        September 2014
    St. Scholastica Academy                                                         Covington, LA



VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
    The school is located in a fully developed area in the city of Covington. The heaviest traffic around
    the proposed redevelopment is along S. Jahnke Ave, and E. Boston St. which borders the southeast
    edge of the property being developed and the north edge of the St. Scholastica School.

    The improvement of this facility is not expected to have significant impact on traffic volumes
    during the normal school operations.

    While the intersection of S. Jahncke Ave. and E. 21st Ave. does meet the traffic signal warrant, it is
    only during the morning peak. Also, the intersection of E. 20th Ave. at S. Jahncke Ave. does have
    excessive delay on the E. 20th Ave. approaches. This is a problem is also in the morning peak.

    A study was also performed on the roadway network for an anticipated special event. After a
    review of the volumes at the area around the school facility, it is anticipated that the studied
    intersections are expected to operate within the acceptable Level of Service thresholds.

    A study was also performed on the roadway network for the time period of a potential special
    event. After a review of the volumes at the area around the school facility, it is anticipated that the
    studied intersections are expected to operate within the acceptable Level of Service thresholds for
    this evening time period.



    Recommendations

    The realignment of E. 21st Ave. to a one way westbound instead of eastbound appears to alleviate
    the problem at the intersection of E. 21st Ave. at S. Jahncke Ave.

    There are numerous sidewalks in the neighborhood surrounding the school. To improve pedestrian
    safety and traffic flow in the vicinity of the school improvements, the following improvements
    should be considered:

    Painted crosswalks connecting sidewalks on the following intersections:
     S. Massachusetts and E. Rutland St. at E. 21st St.
     E. Rutland St. at N. Vermont St.
     E. 21st St. at S. Jahncke Ave.
     S. Massachusetts at 20th
     E. 20th St. at S. Jahncke Ave.




                                                  30                                  September 2014
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

    APPENDIX 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


APPENDIX A:   
TRIP GENERATION CALCULATION SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            Trip Generation Summary - Phase 1
                                            Average Weekday Driveway Volumes

     Project:   St. Scholastica                                                                     Open Date:     6/2/2014
 Alternative:   Alternative 3                                                                         Analysis     6/2/2014


                                                                                     AM Peak Hour               PM Peak Hour
                                                         Average Daily Trips    Adjacent Street Traffic   Adjacent Street Traffic
 ITE   Land Use                                      Enter      Exit    Total   Enter    Exit     Total   Enter     Exit       Total
435    RECMULTI 1                                                                                          79       64         143
       40       Gross Floor Area 1000 SF


Unadjusted Driveway Volume                               0       0        0      0        0         0      79       64         143
Unadjusted Pass-By Trips                                 0       0        0      0        0         0      0         0          0
Internal Capture Trips                                   0       0        0      0        0         0      0         0          0

Adjusted Driveway Volume                                 0       0        0      0        0         0      79       64         143
Adjusted Pass-By Trips                                   0       0        0      0        0         0      0         0          0
Adjusted Volume Added to Adjacent Streets                0       0        0      0        0         0      79       64         143



       Total AM Peak Hour Internal Capture = 0 Percent

       Total PM Peak Hour Internal Capture = 0 Percent




                  Source: Institute of Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation Manual 9th Edition, 2012
                                      TRIP GENERATION 2013, TRAFFICWARE, LLC                                               3
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
APPENDIX B:   
Turning Movement Count Data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Theard St -- E 20th Ave                                                                                            QC JOB #: 12777201
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                      DATE: Thu, Aug 28 2014
                     43             137                         Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                    4.7        2.2

                     17       0     26
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                                 11.8 0.0 0.0


       144   27                            30   73
                                                                                                                    2.8   3.7                      3.3       1.4
             43              0.64          43
                                                                                                                          0.0                      0.0
       70    0                              0   77
                                                                                                                    1.4   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     84       80    8
                                                                                                                                 2.4 1.3 0.0

                         0          172
                                                                                                                                 0.0        1.7



                              7                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             5                            147                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                              24                                                                                                  0    1    0




                             NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                           NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                        NA



 15-Min Count                 S Theard St                    S Theard St                   E 20th Ave                 E 20th Ave                  Total       Hourly
    Period                   (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right        U    Left    Thru Right    U       Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    6:00 AM         0           2      0        0      2       0      0    0        2       3      0    0     0        2       2       0           13
    6:15 AM         0           0      0        0      1       0      1    0        1       1      0    0     0        2       3       0            9
    6:30 AM         0           0      0        0      0       0      2    0        0       1      0    0     0        1       1       0            5
    6:45 AM         1          12      0        0      0       0      1    0        3       2      0    0     0        1       0       0           20               47
    7:00 AM         6           8      1        0     10       0      4    0        4       8      0    0     0        1       1       0           43               77
    7:15 AM         4          19      4        0      5       0      5    0        7       5      0    0     0        3       4       0           56              124
    7:30 AM        38          31      1        0      8       0      4    0        7      18      0    0     0       18      14       0          139              258
    7:45 AM        36          22      2        0      3       0      4    0        9      12      0    0     0       21      11       0          120              358
    8:00 AM         0           0      0        0      2       0      4    0        4       3      0    0     0        5       5       0           23              338
    8:15 AM         0           0      0        0      1       0      6    0        1       1      0    0     0        7       0       0           16              298
    8:30 AM         0           0      0        0      2       0      2    0        3       1      0    0     0        3       0       0           11              170
    8:45 AM         0           0      0        0      1       0      2    0        4       0      0    0     0        2       3       0           12               62




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates   Left          Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles 152           124      4     0         32      0     16     0        28     72      0    0     0       72    56     0                      556
 Heavy Trucks    0             0      0                0      0      8               0      0      0          0        0     0                             8
  Pedestrians                 32                             12                             0                        196                                  240
    Bicycles     0             0      0               0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Theard St -- E 20th Ave                                                                                          QC JOB #: 12777202
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                    DATE: Thu, Aug 28 2014
                       68           66                        Peak-Hour: 3:00 PM -- 4:00 PM                                    1.5        0.0

                       44     0     24
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 3:15 PM -- 3:30 PM
                                                                                                                               2.3 0.0 0.0


       113   22                          26   75
                                                                                                                  0.9   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             8               0.69        49
                                                                                                                        0.0                      0.0
       30    0                            0   46
                                                                                                                  0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                       20     18    14
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                         0          52
                                                                                                                               0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

             1                           15                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          0

                              1                                                                                                 0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                          NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                      NA



 15-Min Count                 S Theard St                  S Theard St                   E 20th Ave                 E 20th Ave                  Total       Hourly
    Period                   (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right      U    Left    Thru Right    U       Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    3:00 PM        10           6      7      0     9        0      9    0         8      3      0    0     0        5       5       0           62
    3:15 PM         5           4      2      0     5        0    22     0         3      3      0    0     0       25      13       0           82
    3:30 PM         3           2      3      0     6        0      6    0         6      2      0    0     0       13       4       0           45
    3:45 PM         2           6      2      0     4        0      7    0         5      0      0    0     0        6       4       0           36              225
    4:00 PM         9           5      3      0     3        0      6    0         4      1      0    0     0        5       3       0           39              202
    4:15 PM         5           3      2      0     3        0      6    0        10      3      0    0     0        1       3       0           36              156
    4:30 PM         3           6      0      0     7        0      6    0         1      2      0    0     0        2       2       0           29              140
    4:45 PM         8           7      2      0     4        0    15     0         4      4      0    0     0        1       2       0           47              151
    5:00 PM         8           7      2      0     5        0      8    0         9      1      0    0     0        6       8       0           54              166
    5:15 PM         5           7      1      0     7        0      6    0         5      0      0    0     0        5       3       0           39              169
    5:30 PM         2           4      0      0     7        0      6    0         3      1      0    0     0        4       3       0           30              170
    5:45 PM         2           2      1      0     4        0      9    0         6      2      0    0     0        2       1       0           29              152
    6:00 PM         1           2      1      0     4        0      4    0         6      1      0    0     0        2       1       0           22              120
    6:15 PM         0           2      1      0     3        0      5    0         4      0      0    0     0        0       5       0           20              101
    6:30 PM         0           0      0      0     4        0      6    0         4      0      0    0     0        2       2       0           18               89
    6:45 PM         0           2      0      0     0        0      4    0         3      0      0    0     0        0       2       0           11               71




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                   Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U      Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     20         16      8     0       20      0     88     0        12     12      0    0     0      100    52     0                      328
 Heavy Trucks       0          0      0              0      0      4               0      0      0          0        0     0                              4
  Pedestrians                  4                            0                             4                         44                                   52
    Bicycles       0           0      0             0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Theard St -- E 20th Ave                                                                                             QC JOB #: 12777203
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                       DATE: Thu, Aug 28 2014
                       24           26                           Peak-Hour: 7:00 PM -- 8:00 PM                                    0.0        0.0

                       14     5     5
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:00 PM -- 7:15 PM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0


       18    10                           9   13
                                                                                                                     5.6   0.0                      0.0       7.7
             1               0.86         4
                                                                                                                           0.0                     25.0
       11    0                            0       6
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         0    7     0
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0

                         5          7
                                                                                                                                  0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                    1    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

             0                            0                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                              0                                                                                                    0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                         NA



 15-Min Count                 S Theard St                     S Theard St                   E 20th Ave                 E 20th Ave                  Total       Hourly
    Period                   (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right      U       Left    Thru Right    U       Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    7:00 PM        0            2      0      0        4        0      2    0        3       0      0    0     0        1      4        0           16
    7:15 PM        0            2      0      0        0        2      3    0        1       1      0    0     0        0      1        0           10
    7:30 PM        0            2      0      0        1        1      2    0        5       0      0    0     0        0      2        0           13
    7:45 PM        0            1      0      0        0        2      7    0        1       0      0    0     0        3      2        0           16              55
    8:00 PM        0            0      0      0        0        0      2    0        2       0      0    0     0        0      1        0            5              44
    8:15 PM        0            0      0      0        3        1      5    0        2       0      0    0     0        0      0        0           11              45
    8:30 PM        0            0      0      0        6        0      1    0        1       0      0    0     0        0      1        0            9              41
    8:45 PM        0            0      0      0        0        1      2    0        0       0      0    0     0        2      0        0            5              30
    9:00 PM        1            4      0      0        0        0      1    0        5       0      0    0     0        0      0        0           11              36
    9:15 PM        0            3      0      0        0        1      3    0        0       0      0    0     0        0      1        0            8              33




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U         Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0           8      0     0          16      0      8     0        12      0      0    0     0        4    16     0                       64
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0                 0      0      0               0      0      0          0        0     0                              0
  Pedestrians                  0                               0                             0                          0                                    0
    Bicycles       0           0      0                0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Massachusetts St -- E Boston St                                                                                    QC JOB #: 12777207
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                       14           38                          Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                                    0.0        0.0

                         6    3     5
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


       509   20                           16   553
                                                                                                                    2.2   0.0                      0.0      1.8
             556             0.94        498
                                                                                                                          2.9                      2.0
       606   30                           39   567
                                                                                                                    2.8   3.3                      0.0      2.8

                         5    2     6
                                                                                                                                 20.0 0.0 0.0

                       72           13
                                                                                                                                 1.4        7.7



                              22                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             24                            3                                                                              1                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                              4                                                                                                   0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                          NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                        NA



 15-Min Count        S Massachusetts St                 S Massachusetts St                E Boston St                 E Boston St                 Total      Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U             Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    6:00 AM        0      0      2      0             1       1     0      0        0      28     1     0      0       37     1        0           71
    6:15 AM        0      0      1      0             1       0     0      0        0      59     0     0      0       69     1        0          131
    6:30 AM        0      0      0      0             0       0     0      0        0      56     1     0      0       99     1        0          157
    6:45 AM        0      0      0      0             3       0     0      0        0      83     2     0      7       96     0        0          191             550
    7:00 AM        0      0      0      0             2       0     0      0        1     105     8     0      6     149      1        0          272             751
    7:15 AM        0      0      2      0             3       1     2      0        3     127    12     0     14     133      2        0          299             919
    7:30 AM        0      1      1      0             1       0     2      0        4     146    12     0     11     134      4        0          316            1078
    7:45 AM        2      0      1      0             1       0     2      0        7     137     3     0     13     124      4        0          294            1181
    8:00 AM        3      1      2      0             0       2     0      0        6     146     3     0      1     107      6        0          277            1186
    8:15 AM        3      1      3      0             0       0     0      0        2     124     0     0      1     113      6        0          253            1140
    8:30 AM        0      0      0      0             4       0     0      0        3     135     2     0      1     118      2        0          265            1089
    8:45 AM        1      1      1      0             3       0     0      0        1     139     0     0      1     102      1        0          250            1045




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles     0           4      4     0         4       0      8     0        16    584    48     0     44     536    16     0                     1264
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0               0       0      0               0      8      0           0       8     0                            16
  Pedestrians                  4                             20                            16                          4                                  44
    Bicycles       0           0      0               0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Massachusetts St -- E Boston St                                                                                    QC JOB #: 12777208
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                       17           19                          Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                    0.0        0.0

                         4    2     11
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


       616   3                            15   630
                                                                                                                    1.9   0.0                      0.0      2.1
             548             0.99        609
                                                                                                                          1.1                      2.0
       565   14                            6   562
                                                                                                                    1.1   0.0                     16.7      1.1

                         3    1     3
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                       22           7
                                                                                                                                 4.5        0.0



                              0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             1                             0                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                              0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                          NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                        NA



 15-Min Count         S Massachusetts St                S Massachusetts St                E Boston St                 E Boston St                 Total      Hourly
    Period               (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right       U            Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    3:00 PM         0      0      0      0            2       1     0      0        4     148     0     0     2      128      3        0          288
    3:15 PM        11      1     17      0            0       0     1      0        6     148     3     0     7      137      3        0          334
    3:30 PM         2      2      1      0            2       0     1      0        5     116     2     0     2      130      6        0          269
    3:45 PM         1      0      0      0            2       0     0      0        0     165     2     0     1      109      3        0          283            1174
    4:00 PM         2      1      1      0            4       0     2      0        3     132     0     0     2      136      3        0          286            1172
    4:15 PM         0      0      0      0            3       1     0      0        1     133     5     0     5      121      0        0          269            1107
    4:30 PM         0      0      2      0            3       0     1      0        1     142     2     0     2      152      4        0          309            1147
    4:45 PM         1      0      0      0            5       1     1      0        0     120     5     0     1      170      5        0          309            1173
    5:00 PM         1      0      0      0            3       1     1      0        1     137     2     0     2      146      3        0          297            1184
    5:15 PM         1      1      1      0            0       0     1      0        1     149     5     0     1      141      3        0          304            1219
    5:30 PM         1      0      3      0            2       1     0      0        2     131     4     0     1      122      4        0          271            1181
    5:45 PM         2      0      3      0            0       0     0      0        1     111     3     0     3      126      1        0          250            1122
    6:00 PM         1      0      2      0            2       0     0      0        0     117     0     0     2      132      4        0          260            1085
    6:15 PM         0      0      1      0            2       0     0      0        2     104     1     0     0      121      3        0          234            1015
    6:30 PM         1      0      0      0            1       0     0      0        0      96     0     0     3      107      0        0          208             952
    6:45 PM         1      0      0      0            0       0     0      0        1      97     1     0     2        97     3        0          202             904




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles     0           0      8     0         12      0      4     0        4     568      8    0     8      608    16     0                     1236
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0                0      0      0              0       8      0          0       16     0                            24
  Pedestrians                  0                              0                             0                          0                                   0
    Bicycles       0           0      0               0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Massachusetts St -- E Boston St                                                                                   QC JOB #: 12777209
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                         4          4                          Peak-Hour: 7:00 PM -- 8:00 PM                                    0.0        25.0

                         1    1     2
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:00 PM -- 7:15 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0


       308   1                            3   310
                                                                                                                   1.9   0.0                      33.3       2.3
             340             0.83       306
                                                                                                                         2.4                       2.0
       343   2                            1   344
                                                                                                                   2.3   0.0                       0.0       2.3

                         1    0     2
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                         4          3
                                                                                                                                0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                  0    0     0



                                                                                                                         0                           0

             0                            0                                                                              0                           0

                                                                                                                         0                           0

                              1                                                                                                  0    0     0




                             NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                         NA                                                                               NA                        NA




                             NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min Count        S Massachusetts St                S Massachusetts St                E Boston St                 E Boston St                  Total       Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    7:00 PM        0      0      2      0            0       0     1      0        0     104     1     0     1        89     2        0           200
    7:15 PM        1      0      0      0            1       1     0      0        1      98     0     0     0        85     1        0           188
    7:30 PM        0      0      0      0            1       0     0      0        0      76     0     0     0        59     0        0           136
    7:45 PM        0      0      0      0            0       0     0      0        0      62     1     0     0        73     0        0           136              660
    8:00 PM        2      0      0      0            0       0     0      0        0      61     1     0     3        52     2        0           121              581
    8:15 PM        1      1      1      0            0       0     0      0        0      58     0     0     0        49     0        0           110              503
    8:30 PM        0      0      2      0            2       1     0      0        0      49     0     0     0        52     0        0           106              473
    8:45 PM        0      0      0      0            0       0     0      0        0      60     0     0     0        33     0        0            93              430
    9:00 PM        0      0      0      0            1       0     0      0        0      47     0     0     1        34     3        0            86              395
    9:15 PM        0      0      1      0            0       1     1      0        0      36     0     0     0        49     0        0            88              373




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     0           0      8     0        0       0      4     0        0     416      4    0     4      356     8     0                       800
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0              0       0      0              0      12      0          0       12     0                              24
  Pedestrians                  0                             0                             0                          0                                     0
    Bicycles       0           0      0              0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Jahncke Ave -- E 20th Ave                                                                                         QC JOB #: 12777210
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                    351          243                           Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                    0.9        0.8

                       24 324     3
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.9 0.0


       59    53                         0       4
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
             23           0.69          2
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       120   44                         2   30
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                       33 190    4
                                                                                                                                0.0 1.1 0.0

                    370          227
                                                                                                                                0.8        0.9



                           10                                                                                                    0    0    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

             2                          0                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                           0                                                                                                     0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                        NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                          NA



 15-Min Count          S Jahncke Ave                     S Jahncke Ave                    E 20th Ave                 E 20th Ave                  Total      Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right           U       Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    6:00 AM         0      3     0          0        0      1      2     0          1      0       0   0     0        0      0        0            7
    6:15 AM         0    14      0          0        0      6      0     0          0      0       0   0     0        0      0        0           20
    6:30 AM         1     11     0          0        0      7      0     0          0      0       0   0     0        1      0        0           20
    6:45 AM         1    16      0          0        0     21      0     0          2      0       2   0     0        0      0        0           42              89
    7:00 AM         7    21      0          0        0     43      7     0          1      0       7   0     0        0      0        0           86             168
    7:15 AM         9    48      0          0        0    101      7     0          3      1       2   0     0        0      0        0          171             319
    7:30 AM        12    73      0          0        1    113      4     0         24     12      11   0     1        2      0        0          253             552
    7:45 AM         5    48      4          0        2     67      6     0         25     10      24   0     1        0      0        0          192             702
    8:00 AM         0    41      0          0        0      8      2     0          3      1       3   0     2        2      3        0           65             681
    8:15 AM         1    41      1          0        0     13      1     0          0      1       0   0     4        0      8        0           70             580
    8:30 AM         0    24      0          0        0     18      0     0          1      1       1   0     0        2      1        0           48             375
    8:45 AM         0    29      0          0        1     20      0     0          0      3       1   0     0        1      2        0           57             240




 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                       Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left    Thru Right     U          Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles     48     292      0     0           4     452     16     0        96     48    44     0     4        8     0     0                     1012
 Heavy Trucks       0       0      0                 0       4      0               0      0      0          0        0     0                             4
  Pedestrians               0                                0                             0                          0                                   0
    Bicycles       0        0      0                 0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Jahncke Ave -- E 20th Ave                                                                                         QC JOB #: 12777211
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                       97           226                        Peak-Hour: 3:00 PM -- 4:00 PM                                    1.0        0.4

                         8    88     1
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 3:15 PM -- 3:30 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 1.1 0.0


       31    26                            1   17
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             16              0.78          9
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       70    28                            7   21
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                       14 199       4
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.5 0.0

                    123             217
                                                                                                                                0.8        0.5



                              11                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

             0                             2                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                              7                                                                                                  0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                           NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min Count          S Jahncke Ave                     S Jahncke Ave                    E 20th Ave                 E 20th Ave                  Total       Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right              U    Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    3:00 PM        4     57      1             0     0     17      2     0          5      3       6   0     4        1      0        0          100
    3:15 PM        5     54      2             0     0     30      3     0          5     12      10   0     2        5      1        0          129
    3:30 PM        2     48      1             0     0     22      2     0          7      0       8   0     1        0      0        0           91
    3:45 PM        3     40      0             0     1     19      1     0          9      1       4   0     0        3      0        0           81              401
    4:00 PM        4     37      1             0     0     28      1     0          5      1       3   0     0        0      0        0           80              381
    4:15 PM        0     28      1             0     0     20      3     0         16      0       5   0     1        2      0        0           76              328
    4:30 PM        1     36      0             0     0     34      0     0          3      1       0   0     0        0      0        0           75              312
    4:45 PM        1     51      0             0     0     29      0     0          7      1       7   0     0        0      0        0           96              327
    5:00 PM        0     49      0             0     0     34      3     0          3      1       3   0     0        0      0        0           93              340
    5:15 PM        3     48      2             0     0     28      0     0          3      1       3   0     0        0      1        0           89              353
    5:30 PM        1     49      0             0     0     33      0     0          2      0       6   0     0        0      0        0           91              369
    5:45 PM        2     48      1             0     0     26      1     0          3      0       1   0     0        1      0        0           83              356
    6:00 PM        4     28      1             0     0     22      0     0         10      2       5   0     0        0      0        0           72              335
    6:15 PM        0     16      0             0     0     19      3     0          0      1       1   0     0        0      0        0           40              286
    6:30 PM        1     24      0             0     0     26      0     0          1      0       2   0     0        0      0        0           54              249
    6:45 PM        1     24      0             0     0     18      0     0          3      0       3   0     0        0      0        0           49              215




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     20        216      8     0        0     120     12     0        20     48    40     0     8       20     4     0                      516
 Heavy Trucks       0          4      0              0       0      0               0      0      0          0        0     0                              4
  Pedestrians                 20                            40                             0                          4                                   64
    Bicycles       0           0      0              0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Jahncke Ave -- E 20th Ave                                                                                           QC JOB #: 12777212
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                       53           65                           Peak-Hour: 7:00 PM -- 8:00 PM                                    1.9        0.0

                         1    52    0
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:00 PM -- 7:15 PM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 1.9 0.0


       4     4                            1       4
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             3               0.91         1
                                                                                                                           0.0                      0.0
       10    3                            2       3
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         4    60    0
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0

                       59           64
                                                                                                                                  1.7        0.0



                              1                                                                                                    0    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

             1                            0                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                              0                                                                                                    0    1    0




                             NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                         NA



 15-Min Count          S Jahncke Ave                       S Jahncke Ave                    E 20th Ave                 E 20th Ave                  Total       Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right             U       Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    7:00 PM        1     20      0            0        0      8      0     0         3       1      1    0     1        0      1        0           36
    7:15 PM        1     17      0            0        0     10      1     0         1       0      1    0     1        0      0        0           32
    7:30 PM        0      11     0            0        0     19      0     0         0       2      0    0     0        1      0        0           33
    7:45 PM        0     12      0            2        0     15      0     0         0       0      1    0     0        0      0        0           30              131
    8:00 PM        2      11     0            0        0     11      0     0         1       0      0    0     0        0      0        0           25              120
    8:15 PM        3     10      0            0        0      9      0     0         2       1      3    0     0        0      0        0           28              116
    8:30 PM        0       3     0            0        0      7      0     0         1       1      3    0     0        0      0        0           15               98
    8:45 PM        0       5     0            0        0      8      0     0         0       0      1    0     0        0      0        0           14               82
    9:00 PM        0       7     0            0        0      4      0     0         0       0      0    0     0        1      0        0           12               69
    9:15 PM        0       2     0            0        1      7      0     0         0       0      0    0     0        1      0        0           11               52




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U         Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     4          80      0     0          0      32      0     0        12      4      4    0     4        0     4     0                      144
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0                0       0      0               0      0      0          0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians                  0                               4                             0                          0                                   4
    Bicycles       0           0      0                0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Massachusetts St -- E 20th Ave                                                                                   QC JOB #: 12777213
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                       14           4                         Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                    0.0        0.0

                         7    4     3
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       49    1                           3    44
                                                                                                                  0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             119             0.63       38
                                                                                                                        0.0                      0.0
       143   23                          3   123
                                                                                                                  0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         4    0     1
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                       30           5
                                                                                                                               0.0        0.0



                              4                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

             3                           0                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          0

                              0                                                                                                 0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                         NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                      NA



 15-Min Count        S Massachusetts St               S Massachusetts St                 E 20th Ave                 E 20th Ave                  Total       Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    6:00 AM        0      0      0      0           0       0     0      0        0       2       0   0     1        1      0        0            4
    6:15 AM        0      0      0      0           0       0     0      0        0       0       0   0     0        0      0        0            0
    6:30 AM        0      0      0      0           0       0     1      0        0       0       0   0     0        2      0        0            3
    6:45 AM        0      0      0      0           1       0     1      0        0       2       0   0     0        1      1        0            6               13
    7:00 AM        1      0      0      0           0       0     2      0        0       8       1   0     0        8      0        0           20               29
    7:15 AM        0      0      0      0           1       1     2      0        1       5       0   0     0       12      1        0           23               52
    7:30 AM        1      0      0      0           1       1     2      0        0      51      12   0     1       10      2        0           81              130
    7:45 AM        2      0      1      0           1       2     1      0        0      55      10   0     2        8      0        0           82              206
    8:00 AM        1      0      0      0           3       1     1      0        0       4       2   0     0        4      0        0           16              202
    8:15 AM        0      0      1      0           0       0     0      0        0       0       0   0     0        2      0        0            3              182
    8:30 AM        0      0      1      0           0       1     1      0        1       2       0   0     0        2      0        0            8              109
    8:45 AM        0      0      1      0           0       0     1      0        0       3       0   0     0        0      0        0            5               32




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                   Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U      Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     8           0      4     0       4       8      4     0        0     220    40     0     8       32     0     0                      328
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0             0       0      0              0       0      0          0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians                  0                            4                             4                          0                                   8
    Bicycles       0           0      0             0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Massachusetts St -- E 20th Ave                                                                                    QC JOB #: 12777214
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                       43           2                         Peak-Hour: 3:00 PM -- 4:00 PM                                     2.3        0.0

                       18     7     18
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 3:15 PM -- 3:30 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 14.3 0.0


       51    1                            1   45
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             47              0.44        30
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       64    16                          14   68
                                                                                                                   1.6   6.3                      0.0       0.0

                         3    0     3
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                       37           6
                                                                                                                                5.4        0.0



                              4                                                                                                  1    0    0



                                                                                                                         1                          0

             7                            2                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                              6                                                                                                  0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                          NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min Count        S Massachusetts St                S Massachusetts St                 E 20th Ave                 E 20th Ave                  Total       Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right       U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    3:00 PM        0      0      1      0            1       0     0      0        0      12       2   0      1       4      0        0           21
    3:15 PM        2      0      0      0           12       6    13      0        0      14      13   0     12      16      1        0           89
    3:30 PM        0      0      2      0            5       1     4      0        0       8       0   0      1       3      0        0           24
    3:45 PM        1      0      0      0            0       0     1      0        1      13       1   0      0       7      0        0           24              158
    4:00 PM        0      0      1      0            2       0     1      0        0       6       2   0      0       2      0        0           14              151
    4:15 PM        0      0      0      0            9       3     5      0        1      11       0   0      0       5      0        0           34               96
    4:30 PM        1      0      0      0            2       0     5      0        0       2       3   0      0       0      0        0           13               85
    4:45 PM        0      0      1      0            3       2     1      0        0      10       1   0      0       2      0        0           20               81
    5:00 PM        0      0      0      0            3       0     3      0        0       4       1   0      0       2      0        0           13               80
    5:15 PM        1      0      0      0            0       0     1      0        0       7       1   0      0       3      0        0           13               59
    5:30 PM        0      0      0      0            1       1     0      0        0       7       1   0      0       2      0        0           12               58
    5:45 PM        1      0      0      0            2       0     2      0        0       2       1   0      0       2      1        0           11               49
    6:00 PM        0      0      0      0           13       0     8      0        0       4       0   0      0       4      0        0           29               65
    6:15 PM        0      0      0      0            0       2     1      0        0       2       1   0      0       3      0        0            9               61
    6:30 PM        0      0      0      0            0       2     1      0        0       3       4   0      0       1      0        0           11               60
    6:45 PM        0      0      0      0            0       0     0      0        1       5       2   0      0       1      0        0            9               58




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                   Southbound                     Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U      Left   Thru Right    U         Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     8           0      0     0       48     24     52     0         0      56    52     0     48      64     4     0                      356
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0              0      4      0               0       0      0           0       0     0                              4
  Pedestrians                 12                           16                             28                          8                                   64
    Bicycles       0           0      0             0       0      0               0       0      0           0       0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Massachusetts St -- E 20th Ave                                                                                    QC JOB #: 12777215
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                     DATE: Fri, Sep 26 2014
                         6          0                          Peak-Hour: 7:30 PM -- 8:30 PM                                    0.0        0.0

                         5    1     0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 8:15 PM -- 8:30 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0


       13    0                           0      7
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             11              0.59        7
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       12    1                           0   11
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         1    0     0
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                         2          1
                                                                                                                                0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

             0                           0                                                                               2                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                         NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min Count        S Massachusetts St                S Massachusetts St                 E 20th Ave                 E 20th Ave                  Total       Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    7:00 PM        0      0      0      0            0       0     4      0        0       7      0    0     0        1      0        0           12
    7:15 PM        0      0      0      0            0       0     0      0        0       1      0    0     0        1      0        0            2
    7:30 PM        1      0      0      0            0       0     2      0        0       2      0    0     0        2      0        0            7
    7:45 PM        0      0      0      0            0       0     2      0        0       1      0    0     0        0      0        0            3              24
    8:00 PM        0      0      0      0            0       1     0      0        0       1      1    0     0        2      0        0            5              17
    8:15 PM        0      0      0      0            0       0     1      0        0       7      0    0     0        3      0        0           11              26
    8:30 PM        0      0      1      0            0       0     0      0        0       3      0    0     0        0      0        0            4              23
    8:45 PM        0      0      0      0            0       0     0      0        0       1      0    0     0        0      0        0            1              21
    9:00 PM        0      0      0      0            0       0     0      0        0       0      0    0     1        0      0        0            1              17
    9:15 PM        0      0      0      0            0       0     0      0        0       0      0    0     1        0      0        0            1               7




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0           0      0     0        0       0      4     0        0      28      0    0     0       12     0     0                       44
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0              0       0      0              0       0      0          0        0     0                              0
  Pedestrians                  0                             0                             0                          0                                    0
    Bicycles       0           0      0              0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Jahncke Ave -- E 21st Ave                                                                                            QC JOB #: 12777216
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                    249             325                           Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                    1.6        0.6

                         0   246     3
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 1.6 0.0


       0     82                            1       3
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
             26              0.66          0
                                                                                                                            0.0                      0.0
       211   103                           2   29
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                         0   242    0
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.8 0.0

                    351             242
                                                                                                                                   1.1        0.8



                              3                                                                                                     0    0    2



                                                                                                                            0                          0

             1                             2                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                            0                          0

                              2                                                                                                     0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                           NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                          NA



 15-Min Count          S Jahncke Ave                        S Jahncke Ave                    E 21st Ave                 E 21st Ave                  Total      Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                        (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right              U       Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    6:00 AM        0       4     0             0        0      3      0     0          0      0       0   0     0        0      0        0            7
    6:15 AM        0     14      0             0        0      6      0     0          0      0       0   0     0        0      0        0           20
    6:30 AM        0      11     0             0        0      7      0     0          0      0       0   0     0        0      0        0           18
    6:45 AM        0     18      0             0        0     21      0     0          0      0       0   0     0        0      0        0           39              84
    7:00 AM        0     22      0             0        0     46      0     0          6      0       6   0     0        0      0        0           80             157
    7:15 AM        0     49      0             0        1     80      0     0         18      1      28   0     0        0      0        0          177             314
    7:30 AM        0     99      0             0        1     78      0     0         32     16      39   0     1        0      0        0          266             562
    7:45 AM        0     72      0             0        1     42      0     0         26      9      30   0     1        0      1        0          182             705
    8:00 AM        0     36     12             0        0      9      0     0          1      2       1   0     0        0      1        0           62             687
    8:15 AM        0     38     11             0        0     14      0     0          0      0       0   0     0        0      1        0           64             574
    8:30 AM        0     26      0             0        0     18      0     0          0      0       0   0     0        0      0        0           44             352
    8:45 AM        0     31      0             0        0     20      0     0          1      0       1   0     0        0      1        0           54             224




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                       Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U          Left   Thru Right    U       Left    Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles     0         396      0     0           4     312      0     0      128      64   156     0     4        0     0     0                     1064
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0                 0       8      0              0       0      0          0        0     0                             8
  Pedestrians                  8                                8                             0                          0                                  16
    Bicycles       0           0      0                 2       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                             2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                            SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Jahncke Ave -- E 21st Ave                                                                                            QC JOB #: 12777217
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                       68           244                           Peak-Hour: 3:00 PM -- 4:00 PM                                    4.4        0.8

                         0    66     2
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 3:15 PM -- 3:30 PM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 4.5 0.0


       0     31                            4       7
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             31              0.66          0
                                                                                                                            0.0                      0.0
       92    30                            3   50
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         0   209 17
                                                                                                                                   0.0 1.0 0.0

                       99           226
                                                                                                                                   3.0        0.9



                              0                                                                                                     0    0    0



                                                                                                                            0                          0

             1                             2                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                            0                          0

                              7                                                                                                     0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                           NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                          NA



 15-Min Count          S Jahncke Ave                        S Jahncke Ave                    E 21st Ave                 E 21st Ave                  Total       Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                        (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right              U       Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    3:00 PM        0     57      5             0        1     19      0     0          1      0       1   0     0        0      1        0           85
    3:15 PM        0     50     11             0        1      8      0     0         22     30      23   0     2        0      1        0          148
    3:30 PM        0     53      0             0        0     19      0     0          7      1       5   0     0        0      1        0           86
    3:45 PM        0     49      1             0        0     20      0     0          1      0       1   0     1        0      1        0           74              393
    4:00 PM        0     42      0             0        1     26      0     0          3      0       2   0     1        1      1        0           77              385
    4:15 PM        1     42      2             0        0     24      0     0          0      0       1   0     1        0      0        0           71              308
    4:30 PM        0     38      1             0        0     29      0     0          0      1       2   0     1        0      1        0           73              295
    4:45 PM        0     59      1             0        1     28      0     0          0      1       2   0     0        1      1        0           94              315
    5:00 PM        0     55      0             0        0     38      0     0          1      1       0   0     1        0      3        0           99              337
    5:15 PM        1     50      1             0        1     28      0     0          0      1       0   0     0        0      1        0           83              349
    5:30 PM        0     51      0             0        0     31      0     0          0      0       1   0     1        0      0        0           84              360
    5:45 PM        1     51      0             0        0     24      0     0          0      0       0   0     0        1      1        0           78              344
    6:00 PM        0     38      0             0        0     18      0     0          0      0       3   0     1        0      1        0           61              306
    6:15 PM        0     16      0             0        1     23      0     0          0      0       0   0     1        0      0        0           41              264
    6:30 PM        0     28      1             0        0     25      0     0          0      0       1   0     0        0      0        0           55              235
    6:45 PM        0     27      0             0        0     19      0     0          0      0       1   0     0        0      0        0           47              204




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                       Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U          Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0         200     44     0           4      32      0     0        88    120    92     0     8        0     4     0                      592
 Heavy Trucks      0           8      0                 0       4      0               0      0      0          0        0     0                             12
  Pedestrians                 24                                0                             4                          4                                   32
    Bicycles       0           0      0                 0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                            SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Jahncke Ave -- E 21st Ave                                                                                           QC JOB #: 12777218
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                       56           63                           Peak-Hour: 7:00 PM -- 8:00 PM                                    1.8        0.0

                         0    54    2
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:00 PM -- 7:15 PM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 1.9 0.0


       0     0                            2       2
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0               0.92         0
                                                                                                                           0.0                      0.0
       0     0                            0       4
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         0    61    2
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0

                       54           63
                                                                                                                                  1.9        0.0



                              0                                                                                                    0    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

             1                            0                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                              0                                                                                                    0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                         NA



 15-Min Count          S Jahncke Ave                       S Jahncke Ave                    E 21st Ave                 E 21st Ave                  Total       Hourly
    Period              (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right             U       Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    7:00 PM        0     23      1            0        0      9      0     0         0       0      0    0     0        0      0        0           33
    7:15 PM        0     17      0            0        1     12      0     0         0       0      0    0     0        0      1        0           31
    7:30 PM        0     10      1            0        1     18      0     0         0       0      0    0     0        0      1        0           31
    7:45 PM        0      11     0            0        0     15      0     0         0       0      0    0     0        0      0        0           26              121
    8:00 PM        0     13      0            0        0     10      0     0         0       0      1    0     0        0      1        0           25              113
    8:15 PM        0     12      0            0        0      9      0     0         0       0      0    0     0        0      0        0           21              103
    8:30 PM        0       4     0            0        0      6      0     0         0       0      1    0     0        0      0        0           11               83
    8:45 PM        0       5     0            0        0      8      0     0         0       0      0    0     0        0      0        0           13               70
    9:00 PM        0       7     0            0        0      4      0     0         0       0      0    0     0        0      0        0           11               56
    9:15 PM        0       2     0            0        0      8      0     0         0       0      0    0     0        0      0        0           10               45




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U         Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0          92      4     0          0      36      0     0        0       0      0    0     0        0     0     0                      132
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0                0       0      0              0       0      0          0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians                  0                               0                             0                          0                                   0
    Bicycles       0           0      0                0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Massachusetts St/E Rutland St -- E 21st Ave/S Massachusetts St                                                       QC JOB #: 12777219
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                        DATE: Thu, Aug 28 2014
                    218             5                            Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                     0.5        20.0

                         3    4     211
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.5


       4     5                              1     1
                                                                                                                     0.0   20.0                      0.0      0.0
             2               0.62           0
                                                                                                                           0.0                       0.0
       36    29                             0   214
                                                                                                                     5.6   3.4                       0.0      0.5

                         0    0     1
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0

                       33           1
                                                                                                                                   3.0        0.0



                              9                                                                                                     0    0     0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

             37                           141                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                             301                                                                                                    0    0     0




                             NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                           NA                                                                               NA                        NA




                             NA                                                                                                          NA



 15-Min CountS Massachusetts St/E RutlandSSt
                                          Massachusetts St/E Rutland ESt21st Ave/S Massachusetts St
                                                                                                 E 21st Ave/S Massachusetts St Total                           Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)               (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                           Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right        U     Left Thru Right      U      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right    U
    6:00 AM      0     0      0      0       1     1     0      0        0       0     8    0        1      0     0    0        11
    6:15 AM      0     0      0      0       0     7     0      0        0       0     5    0        0      0     0    0        12
    6:30 AM      0     0      0      0       0     0     0      0        1       1     1    0        0      0     0    0         3
    6:45 AM      0     0      0      0       0     1     0      0        1       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         2                                   28
    7:00 AM      0     0      0      0      17     0     0      0        3       0     3    0        0      0     0    0        23                                   40
    7:15 AM      0     0      0      0      38     3     1      0        0       2    10    0        0      0     0    0        54                                   82
    7:30 AM      0     0      0      0      90     1     0      0        1       0    10    1        0      0     0    0       103                                  182
    7:45 AM      0     0      1      0      66     0     2      0        0       0     6    0        0      0     1    0        76                                  256
    8:00 AM      0     0      0      0       2     1     1      0        2       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         6                                  239
    8:15 AM      0     0      0      0       0     1     0      0        1       0     1    0        0      0     0    0         3                                  188
    8:30 AM      0     0      0      0       0     0     1      0        0       0     1    0        0      0     0    0         2                                   87
    8:45 AM      0     0      0      0       1     2     0      0        0       1     1    0        0      0     0    0         5                                   16




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U         Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0           0      0     0         360      4      0     0        4       0    40     4     0        0     0     0                      412
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0                 4      0      0              0       0      0          0        0     0                             4
  Pedestrians                420                               0                            16                        156                                  592
    Bicycles       0           0      0                 0      0      0              0       0      0          0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Massachusetts St/E Rutland St -- E 21st Ave/S Massachusetts St                                                    QC JOB #: 12777220
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                     DATE: Thu, Aug 28 2014
                     117            3                          Peak-Hour: 3:15 PM -- 4:15 PM                                    0.0        0.0

                         7    15    95
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 3:15 PM -- 3:30 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0


       7     3                            0     0
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                     0.0      0.0
             3               0.39         0
                                                                                                                         0.0                     0.0
       20    14                           0   98
                                                                                                                   5.0   7.1                     0.0      0.0

                         0    0     0
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                       29           0
                                                                                                                                3.4        0.0



                              24                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                         0                        0

             38                          21                                                                              0                        0

                                                                                                                         0                        0

                             187                                                                                                 0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                          NA                                                                              NA                      NA




                             NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min CountS Massachusetts St/E RutlandSSt
                                          Massachusetts St/E Rutland ESt21st Ave/S Massachusetts St
                                                                                                 E 21st Ave/S Massachusetts St Total                       Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)               (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                       Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right        U     Left Thru Right      U      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right    U
    3:00 PM      0     0      0      0       0     0     1      0        0       0     2    0        0      0     0    0         3
    3:15 PM      0     0      0      0      78     1     1      0        1       0     6    0        0      0     0    0        87
    3:30 PM      0     0      0      0      15     9     4      0        1       2     4    0        0      0     0    0        35
    3:45 PM      0     0      0      0       2     3     0      0        0       1     2    0        0      0     0    0         8                              133
    4:00 PM      0     0      0      0       0     2     2      0        1       0     2    0        0      0     0    0         7                              137
    4:15 PM      0     0      0      0       0     3     0      0        0       1     0    0        0      0     0    0         4                               54
    4:30 PM      0     0      0      0       0     2     0      0        0       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         2                               21
    4:45 PM      0     0      0      0       1     0     0      0        4       0     2    0        0      0     0    0         7                               20
    5:00 PM      0     0      0      0       1     3     3      0        1       0     1    0        0      0     0    0         9                               22
    5:15 PM      0     0      0      0       0     1     2      0        1       1     2    0        0      0     0    0         7                               25
    5:30 PM      0     0      0      0       0     2     2      0        0       1     1    0        0      0     0    0         6                               29
    5:45 PM      0     0      0      0       0     2     1      0        1       0     1    0        0      0     0    0         5                               27
    6:00 PM      0     0      0      0       0     1     2      0        0       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         3                               21
    6:15 PM      0     0      0      0       0     3     1      0        1       0     1    0        0      1     0    0         7                               21
    6:30 PM      0     0      0      0       1     3     0      0        0       0     1    0        0      1     0    0         6                               21
    6:45 PM      0     0      0      0       0     0     0      0        0       1     0    0        0      0     0    0         1                               17




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                    Total
  All Vehicles     0           0      0     0       312      4      4     0        4       0    24     0     0        0     0     0                    348
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0               0      0      0              0       0      4          0        0     0                           4
  Pedestrians                652                            92                           140                         68                                952
    Bicycles       0           0      0               0      0      0              0       0      0          0        0     0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Massachusetts St/E Rutland St -- E 21st Ave/S Massachusetts St                                                    QC JOB #: 12777221
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                     DATE: Thu, Aug 28 2014
                         6          0                          Peak-Hour: 7:00 PM -- 8:00 PM                                    0.0        0.0

                         1    5     0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:15 PM -- 7:30 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0


       2     0                           0      0
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                     0.0      0.0
             1               0.75        0
                                                                                                                         0.0                     0.0
       2     1                           0      1
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                     0.0      0.0

                         1    0     0
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                         6          1
                                                                                                                                0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                         0                        0

             0                           0                                                                               0                        0

                                                                                                                         0                        0

                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                         NA                                                                               NA                      NA




                             NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min CountS Massachusetts St/E RutlandSSt
                                          Massachusetts St/E Rutland ESt21st Ave/S Massachusetts St
                                                                                                 E 21st Ave/S Massachusetts St Total                       Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)               (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                       Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right        U     Left Thru Right      U      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right    U
    7:00 PM      0     0      0      0       0     1     0      0        0       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         1
    7:15 PM      0     0      0      0       0     1     1      0        0       0     1    0        0      0     0    0         3
    7:30 PM      1     0      0      0       0     2     0      0        0       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         3
    7:45 PM      0     0      0      0       0     1     0      0        0       1     0    0        0      0     0    0         2                              9
    8:00 PM      0     0      0      0       0     1     0      0        0       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         1                              9
    8:15 PM      0     0      0      0       0     1     1      0        0       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         2                              8
    8:30 PM      0     0      0      0       0     1     1      0        0       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         2                              7
    8:45 PM      0     0      0      0       0     1     0      0        0       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         1                              6
    9:00 PM      0     0      0      0       0     0     0      0        0       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         0                              5
    9:15 PM      0     0      0      0       0     1     0      0        0       0     0    0        0      0     0    0         1                              4




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                    Total
  All Vehicles     0           0      0     0        0       4      4     0        0       0      4    0     0        0     0     0                     12
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0              0       0      0              0       0      0          0        0     0                            0
  Pedestrians                  0                             0                             0                          0                                  0
    Bicycles       0           0      0              0       0      0              0       0      0          0        0     0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N Vermont St -- E Rutland St                                                                                         QC JOB #: 12777222
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                     211          80                           Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                     0.9        1.3

                     90 114        7
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 1.8 0.0


       243   0                            2   216
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.9
             0             0.68          81
                                                                                                                          0.0                      0.0
       1     1                          133   183
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                      1.5       0.5

                     72     78 176
                                                                                                                                 0.0 1.3 0.6

                    248           326
                                                                                                                                 1.6        0.6



                            5                                                                                                     0    2    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             8                            0                                                                               0                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                            1                                                                                                     0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                         NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                          NA



 15-Min Count              N Vermont St                    N Vermont St                  E Rutland St                E Rutland St                 Total       Hourly
    Period                 (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left      Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right    U       Left   Thru Right     U    Left    Thru Right        U
    6:00 AM         0         2     2         0      0        2     0     0        0       0      0     0      1       0      0        0            7
    6:15 AM         0         7     4         0      0        3     0     0        0       0      0     0      1       1      0        0           16
    6:30 AM         0         7     2         0      1        3     0     0        1       0      0     0      3       0      0        0           17
    6:45 AM         0        11     9         0      1       10     1     0        0       0      0     0     11       0      0        0           43               83
    7:00 AM         6         9    14         0      0       24     9     0        0       0      0     0     22       5      0        0           89              165
    7:15 AM        14        13    41         0      2       34    25     0        0       0      0     0     50      19      1        0          199              348
    7:30 AM        36        29    60         0      3       38    36     0        0       0      0     0     39      35      1        0          277              608
    7:45 AM        16        27    61         0      2       18    20     0        0       0      1     0     22      22      0        0          189              754
    8:00 AM         2         9    28         0      3        1     1     0        0       2      0     0      8       1      0        0           55              720
    8:15 AM         0         9    30         0      1        4     0     0        0       0      0     0     10       0      3        0           57              578
    8:30 AM         1         7    18         0      1        4     0     0        0       0      0     0     14       0      1        0           46              347
    8:45 AM         0        10    23         0      4        9     1     0        0       0      0     0     11       2      1        0           61              219




 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U         Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U     Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles 144         116    240     0          12    152    144     0        0       0      0    0     156     140     4     0                      1108
 Heavy Trucks    0           0      0                 0      4      0              0       0      0            4       0     0                              8
  Pedestrians                4                               8                             8                           0                                   20
    Bicycles     0           0      0                0       2      0              0       0      0            0       0     0                              2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N Vermont St -- E Rutland St                                                                                         QC JOB #: 12777223
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                       55          55                          Peak-Hour: 3:00 PM -- 4:00 PM                                     3.6        0.0

                       22    23    10
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 3:15 PM -- 3:30 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 8.7 0.0


       65    1                           12    79
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                      0.0       2.5
             10             0.76         23
                                                                                                                          0.0                      0.0
       12    1                           44   205
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                      4.5       1.0

                       20    42 184
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 1.1

                       67          246
                                                                                                                                 6.0        0.8



                             20                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             0                            2                                                                               0                          1

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                             3                                                                                                    0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                          NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                         NA



 15-Min Count               N Vermont St                   N Vermont St                  E Rutland St                E Rutland St                 Total       Hourly
    Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right       U     Left    Thru Right    U       Left   Thru Right     U    Left    Thru Right        U
    3:00 PM         2          7    46        0      2        6     1     0        1       1      0     0     13       0      4        0           83
    3:15 PM        15         12    51        0      4        5    16     0        0       2      0     0      4      17      3        0          129
    3:30 PM         2         14    46        0      3        4     5     0        0       4      0     0     15       5      3        1          102
    3:45 PM         1          9    41        0      1        8     0     0        0       3      1     0     11       1      2        0           78              392
    4:00 PM         3          6    38        0      2       11     2     0        0       0      0     0     16       0      4        0           82              391
    4:15 PM         4          3    36        0      3        9     1     0        1       2      0     0     16       2      1        0           78              340
    4:30 PM         0          8    29        0      3       14     1     0        0       1      1     0     13       2      1        0           73              311
    4:45 PM         1         12    48        0      4        8     1     0        1       1      0     0     21       1      0        0           98              331
    5:00 PM         4         10    43        0      9       21     0     0        0       0      0     0     18       3      1        0          109              358
    5:15 PM         3          5    43        0      0       16     1     0        0       3      0     0     14       1      0        0           86              366
    5:30 PM         0         13    39        0      1       15     1     0        0       0      0     0     17       4      0        0           90              383
    5:45 PM         0         13    40        0      1       10     1     0        0       0      0     0     15       1      1        0           82              367
    6:00 PM         1         14    24        0      3        6     3     0        0       0      0     0     12       3      0        0           66              324
    6:15 PM         0          7     9        0      0       11     0     0        1       0      0     0     13       1      1        0           43              281
    6:30 PM         0          7    21        0      0       13     2     0        0       2      0     0     12       2      0        0           59              250
    6:45 PM         0          8    19        0      1       14     0     0        0       1      0     0      5       1      2        0           51              219




 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left      Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U     Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     60        48    204     0         16     20     64     0        0       8      0    0      16      68    12     0                      516
 Heavy Trucks       0         0      4                0      4      0              0       0      0            0       0     0                              8
  Pedestrians                 4                             80                             0                           4                                   88
    Bicycles       0          0      0               0       0      0              0       0      0            0       0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N Vermont St -- E Rutland St                                                                                        QC JOB #: 12777224
 CITY/STATE: Covington, LA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Aug 26 2014
                       31           21                        Peak-Hour: 7:00 PM -- 8:00 PM                                     3.2        0.0

                         2    26    3
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 7:00 PM -- 7:15 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 3.8 0.0


       8     0                            1   34
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0               0.92         3
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       0     0                           30   44
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         3    20    41
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                       56           64
                                                                                                                                1.8        0.0



                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

             1                            0                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                          NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min Count                N Vermont St                 N Vermont St                  E Rutland St                E Rutland St                 Total       Hourly
    Period                   (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right      U    Left    Thru Right    U       Left   Thru Right     U    Left    Thru Right        U
    7:00 PM        1            6    16       0     2        6     0     0        0       0      0     0      3       1      0        0           35
    7:15 PM        0            4    14       0     0        7     1     0        0       0      0     0      6       0      0        0           32
    7:30 PM        1            5     6       0     0        8     0     0        0       0      0     0     11       1      1        0           33
    7:45 PM        1            5     5       0     1        5     1     0        0       0      0     0     10       1      0        0           29              129
    8:00 PM        0            6     8       0     0        5     0     0        0       0      0     0      5       2      1        0           27              121
    8:15 PM        0            4     8       0     0        6     0     0        1       0      0     0      3       1      0        0           23              112
    8:30 PM        0            1     2       0     0        4     0     0        0       1      0     0      2       0      0        0           10               89
    8:45 PM        0            2     3       0     0        5     1     0        0       0      0     0      3       0      1        0           15               75
    9:00 PM        0            3     5       0     0        4     0     0        0       0      0     0      0       0      1        0           13               61
    9:15 PM        0            1     1       0     0        5     0     0        0       0      0     0      3       0      0        0           10               48




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                   Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U      Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U     Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     4          24     64     0       8      24      0     0        0       0      0    0      12       4     0     0                      140
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0             0       0      0              0       0      0            0       0     0                             0
  Pedestrians                  0                            0                             0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0           0      0             0       0      0              0       0      0            0       0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/2/2014 10:30 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                         8282 Goodwood Blvd.
                                                                        Baton Rouge, LA 70806




                                                                                                                                       File Name       : Not Named 1
                                                                                                                                       Site Code       : 00000001
                                                                                                                                       Start Date      : 8/28/2014
                                                                                                                                       Page No         :1
                                                                          Groups Printed- Unshifted
                                                                      20th Ave                 Washington St.                               20th Ave
                       From North                                    From East                    From South                               From West
Start Time     Right   Thru   Left                    Peds   Right   Thru    Left Peds Right       Thru  Left Peds         Right           Thru    Left    Peds Int. Total
   06:00 PM        0      0      0                       0       0      2      0      0      1        0     1    0             0              7      0        0        11
   06:15 PM        0      0      0                       0       0      4      0      0      0        0     0    0             0              3      0        0         7
   06:30 PM        0      0      0                       0       0      6      0      0      0        0     0    0             0              4      0        0        10
   06:45 PM        0      0      0                       0       0      2      0      0      0        0     0    0             0              1      0        0         3
       Total       0      0      0                       0       0     14      0      0      1        0     1    0             0             15      0        0        31

   07:00 PM       0        0        0                    0      0      5       0           0         0     0     0    0                0           4   0      0         9
   07:15 PM       0        0        0                    0      0      1       0           0         0     0     0    0                0           1   0      0         2
   07:30 PM       0        0        0                    0      0      1       0           0         0     0     1    0                0           1   0      0         3
   07:45 PM       0        0        0                    0      0      4       0           0         0     0     0    0                0           0   0      0         4
       Total      0        0        0                    0      0     11       0           0         0     0     1    0                0           6   0      0        18

 Grand Total      0        0        0                    0      0     25       0           0          1    0      2   0                0      21       0      0        49
  Apprch %        0        0        0                    0      0    100       0           0       33.3    0   66.7   0                0     100       0      0
    Total %       0        0        0                    0      0     51       0           0          2    0    4.1   0                0    42.9       0      0



                                                                             Out          In       Total
                                                                                   0           0       0


                                                                               0     0             0   0
                                                                           Right Thru          Left Peds
                              48


                                        0




                                                                                                                          Right Thru
                           Total




                                    Left




                                                                                                                                           Out
                                                                                                                              0


                                                                                                                                             22




                                                                                       North
                                                 21
                                    Peds Right Thru




                                                                                                                                           20th Ave
                        20th Ave

                               21




                                                                                                                                  25
                             In




                                                                                                                                              In




                                                                              8/28/2014 06:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                25
                                             0




                                                                                                                          Left Peds




                                                                              8/28/2014 07:45 PM
                                                                                                                              0
                             27




                                                                              Unshifted
                           Out




                                                                                                                                           Total
                                       0




                                                                                                                                              47
                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                            Left Thru Right Peds
                                                                                2    0    1    0


                                                                                   0       3         3
                                                                             Out        In       Total
                                                                                   Washington St.
